On Tuesday, the company introduced a new subscription level of its streaming music service, offering millions of songs at high resolution — the first time a major streaming outlet has delved into a market long considered an audiophile niche.
Even the price of the new subscription tier, Amazon Music HD, is a statement. It costs $15 a month, or $13 for members of Amazon’s Prime program — less than the $20 to $25 a month that is the norm from smaller outlets like Tidal, Deezer and Qobuz.
Amazon HD customers have access to some 50 million songs in what the company calls HD audio, or the equivalent of CD quality — 16-bit files with sampling rates of 44.1 kilohertz. A subset of “millions” of those songs, Mr. Boom said, are available at the “Ultra HD” level — up to 24-bit and 192 kHz, the highest resolution files that record companies typically produce.
Amazon’s streams are available as FLAC files, a compressed file format favored by many audiophiles because it is “lossless,” meaning that it preserves audio information that would be lost through other forms of compression, like MP3.
The need for improved audio quality has been a frequent complaint since the early days of the MP3, in the 1990s — or even earlier, for those, like Neil Young, who argue that CDs were a step down from vinyl records.
For the biggest digital music services, high-resolution audio has largely been an afterthought until now. Spotify and Apple, the two biggest players — with 232 million and 56 million users each month, respectively — offer no high-resolution tiers.
Several smaller services do offer high-fidelity audio, of various kinds. For $20 a month, Deezer HiFi offers tracks at the equivalent of CD quality, and Tidal has what it calls “master-quality” tracks using the MQA format. Qobuz, a European service that arrived in the United States this year, charges $25 for a plan that includes streaming of files up to 24 bit and 192 kHz; in August, Qobuz said it had signed up 25,000 customers in the United States.
The move by Amazon could put pressure on the other major services to adapt. Amazon, which often targets older consumers and families, has not disclosed its subscriber figures. According to an estimate published by The Financial Times in July, it had 32 million subscribers to its music plans, which include Unlimited, its all-you-can-eat offering to compete with Spotify and Apple Music, as well as its more reduced catalog on Prime Music.
“At some level, consumers have won,” Mr. Boom said. “Listening has never been more convenient. What has been lost in all of that is the focus on audio quality. You’re not hearing the music the way the artist intended for you to hear it.”
Yet the value of high-resolution audio has also been the subject of persistent doubts throughout the industry. A number of academic studies over the years, for example, have found that most people cannot tell the difference between a CD and a digital file above a minimal threshold.
Audio technology can also be a confusing minefield for lay consumers. Not only is there complex terminology — those looking into the issue will soon encounter esoterica like the Nyquist frequency — but it can be unclear just what equipment is necessary to get one’s money’s worth.
Sonos wireless speakers, for example, cannot play audio at levels much higher than CD quality. And while Amazon says that users will not need extra equipment to play many Ultra HD files, that is true only for files at up to 24 bit and 48 kHz — anything higher than that level may require a digital-to-analog converter, or DAC, a separate device that can cost hundreds of dollars.
