Editors’ note: This is part of the Op-Eds From the Future series, in which science fiction authors, futurists, philosophers and scientists write Op-Eds that they imagine we might read 10, 50 or even 200 years from now. The challenges they predict are imaginary — for now — but their arguments illuminate the urgent questions of today and prepare us for tomorrow. The Opinion piece below is a work of fiction.
When Amazon opened the doors of its six-million-square-foot, state-of-the-art, fully automated fulfillment center in Phoenix to the media on Aug. 6, 2034, the star attraction was supposed to be what wasn’t there.
In the now-famous stream of the inauguration event, viewers watched as thousands of robotic picking arms darted among the aisles, fluidly plucking items from the shelves and sorting them into bins. Self-driving mobile pallets ferried towering shelves of goods across the warehouse. When Amazon’s founder and chairman, Jeff Bezos, walked to the door and shut off the lights, the OLEDs that lined the machines were the only things visible in the dark expanse.
“Welcome to the first human-free fulfillment center,” Mr. Bezos said before smashing a bottle of champagne on the floor and summoning an autonomous vacuum to clean up the mess. In the media frenzy that followed, headlines declared that we were witnessing “The End of Work,” and numerous articles heralded a transformation in retailing and speculated that Amazon’s history of unsafe working conditions was now officially behind the company.
But six months after the warehouse’s opening, I am writing to tell you that it is not, in fact, “human free.” While it’s true that Amazon has automated much of the process of sorting, distributing and delivering goods and eliminated much of the repetitive and backbreaking work it once took to do all of those things, the work of human employees is a necessary part of the facility’s operations. By insinuating otherwise, Amazon is disempowering and even endangering those employees. I know, because I’m one of them.
I have worked at this “human free” facility since it opened, performing maintenance on its fleet of robots when they need repairs. I am part of what Amazon refers to as its “contingency network”: the third-party contracting companies that hire human workers to keep the automated facility running. Each of these companies categorizes workers like myself as independent contractors, so they don’t have to pay for health care coverage, time off or workers’ compensation insurance.
We are the technicians who repair the machines when they break down. The janitors who clean up the messes the robots make when other robots can’t do the cleaning or when management decides it would be cheaper or faster for a human to do the task instead. The programmers who fix glitches in the logistics software. And, yes, the pickers who help their robotic counterparts find the right items by hand when the robotic arms get jammed.
Working in a supposedly automated warehouse is hard, lonely and often unsettling. Because of the employment structure — or, rather, the lack of one — there are no managers or authority figures employed by Amazon on-site. Instead, we are under continuous video surveillance, so we receive guidance from off-site supervisors through a text system on our devices while we work. Sometimes I’ll see only a few other workers scattered around the site; other times it seems as if there are hundreds. After all, a lot can go wrong with six million square feet of automated systems.
For instance, a human being later had to remove the bits of Mr. Bezos’s broken champagne bottle from that oversize autonomous vacuum cleaner. One of my colleagues, who was working on the first “contingency crew,” told me all about fishing tiny slivers of glass out of a constricted opening in the bot’s ancillary tube duct — and he has the scars from the deep cuts on his palm to prove it.
At the “human free” fulfillment center, I have seen other members of the contingency crews incur injuries from working with the robots. Just last week, a colleague suffered a blackout from heat stroke while she was repairing the motor on a malfunctioning picker. Because Amazon designed the center as a machine-first environment, there is no general air conditioning, even in the summer, when temperatures inside can reach 110 degrees; this might not be so bad for coolant-loaded machines, but it can be downright torturous for humans who are performing manual labor.
One month ago, a friend of mine threw out their back loading a fallen batch of boxes back onto an “autonomous” pallet after it collided with a QA sentry. Another worker was nearly killed when her shift was erroneously logged as completed by the central database and the facility entered into dark mode; she could not see a poorly lit pallet until it ran directly into her at full speed.
Whenever the autonomous system detects an issue, it generates a ticket that is sent to one of the contracting companies, which then opens the job for bidding among workers on its network. If there is an accident, Amazon relies on its contract with the on-demand medical services company Ambulatory to send a health professional to the site. If Ambulatory’s queue is full, it can take a long time for emergency medical assistance to arrive.
When we have complained to the contracting companies about unsafe conditions, they refer us to Amazon. When we complain to Amazon, they send us back to the contracting companies. Some of us are trying to organize, but our unions have yet to be recognized, and Amazon’s move toward more “automation” has splintered its human work force into disparate companies and crews, making organization difficult. (When contacted for this article, an Amazon representative said: “All primary functions of FC-ONT99 are entirely automated. This facility is the safest, most efficient and most productive fulfillment center Amazon has ever built.”)
It would be too simple, too easy to blame “the robots.” This is a mess made by Amazon and its desire to pretend that its work force has been automated away; take, for example, Amazon’s new ad campaign, which implies that full automation is what makes same-hour delivery possible. By selling the idea that my co-workers and I have all been replaced by robots, Amazon has rendered us invisible and placed us in peril. Automation, when deployed smartly and responsibly, can be a great labor- and timesaving technology. When opportunistic corporations use it to cut corners, it can be dangerous — perhaps even deadly.
Brian Merchant (@bcmerchant) is a journalist, writer and the author of “The One Device: The Secret History of the iPhone.” He is the founder and editor of Terraform, Vice’s speculative fiction project.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.
