And thus ended the existence of a great German artist’s ode to New York — until this week, when an exact replica of Albers’s creation was unveiled in the same spot where it last loomed nearly two decades ago. The bright patchwork, a vibrant centerpiece in the lobby, has made its long-awaited return.
“This is what art was for him: something that could affect you, maybe gave a little bit of joy to the lives of those people rushing to their trains or rushing out of the station to their workday,” said Nicholas Fox Weber, the executive director of the Josef and Anni Albers Foundation.
“Manhattan” was originally commissioned for the building, which opened in 1963 and was owned by Pan Am. Walter Gropius, an architect of the skyscraper, was a founder of the Bauhaus — the storied German art school where Albers studied and taught.
The work towered over the MetLife Building’s gateway to Grand Central for decades before its removal in 2000. “It just doesn’t work for us anymore,” a MetLife spokesman said at the time. (Mr. Weber said then that he felt “physically punched.”)
So “Manhattan” went into storage, where it remained for several years. Tishman Speyer and the Irvine Company acquired the building from MetLife in 2005 and began thinking about how to revitalize the structure, including a plan to bring the mural back.
That was when they discovered the asbestos dwelling behind the Formica panels, leaving the original mural damaged beyond repair. The Albers Foundation saved some panels, Mr. Weber said, but much of the piece was destroyed.
It seems Albers, though, was into painting by numbers — or at least organizing 486 plastic laminate tiles by numbers. The artist died in 1976, but his original notes became a road map for his successors to construct the replica.
“He had a mathematical approach to art — there are numbers underneath everything he did,” Mr. Weber said. “He made meticulous drawings so that the proper dimensions and proportions and fractional elements can be retained.”
When plans to renovate the lobby took hold in 2016, the building owners reached out to the Albers Foundation to propose recreating the mural. A construction and architectural company in Long Island crafted the new incarnation, which was driven over in pieces and reassembled in Manhattan.
“It’s all centered on a vantage point of the Albers piece,” said Rob Speyer, the president and chief executive of Tishman Speyer. “We were able to take a piece of the building’s history, which could’ve been forgotten, and instead restored it as the centerpiece of the building.”
Along with Albers’s drawings, the foundation provided some of the surviving panels for reference to keep the recreated colors accurate to the original. (None of these were physically incorporated in the new work.) One of Albers’s other works also came in handy for color matching — a glass construction created decades earlier called “City,” on which “Manhattan” was based.
