The federal court decision last week to remove the “too big to fail” label from MetLife, the insurance giant, may or may not turn out to be a factor in a future financial crisis. But it is a setback to regulation intended to protect the economy from the inherent risks of an undersupervised financial system.
The decision is a blow to the Financial Stability Oversight Council, established by the Dodd-Frank regulatory reform law. The council’s job is to identify and defuse systemic risks to the economy from nonbank financial firms, including insurance companies and finance companies. The absence of such oversight let Lehman Brothers, American International Group and GE Capital run amok before the financial crisis of 2008, among other disastrous and interlocking developments.
Congress put senior officials on the council and gave them a powerful weapon. Its 10 voting members include the secretary of the Treasury, the head of the Federal Reserve and top financial regulators. The weapon is their authority to designate big and complex financial firms as “systemically important” — in other words, too big to fail. The label subjects a firm to heightened regulatory standards and higher capital requirements.
MetLife argued in court that the council used flawed and inadequate analyses in 2014 when it deemed the insurer to be systemically important. The court agreed with MetLife and removed the label. The judge’s full opinion is under seal and is likely to be released only in redacted form, a move intended, in part, to protect MetLife’s privacy. That is unacceptable. Why would MetLife’s privacy concerns outweigh the public’s right to know?
One baffling aspect of the ruling is that other nonbanks labeled systemically important by the council — A.I.G., GE Capital and Prudential Financial — did not challenge their designations. A.I.G. and GE Capital have undertaken reforms to shrink themselves to less threatening proportions.
MetLife is also moving ahead with similar reforms, despite having fought to shed the too-big-to-fail label. This suggests that the lawsuit was intended not to avoid downsizing but to weaken the council.
As has happened at the Securities and Exchange Commission and other agencies that have lost court battles over their regulatory authority, the case could have a chilling effect on the council’s exercise of its power and consume valuable time and resources if it decides to appeal. All of which could undermine the panel’s ability to spot and tame systemic risks before they explode.
The Dodd-Frank reforms need defending and strengthening, not weakening. The law is the main bulwark against renewed recklessness in the financial system. It is working, if slowly, to reduce risks of another crisis, and it is under attack. It needs champions in high places.
