Firefighting vehicles dating from the beginning of the 20th century to the present will be on display today from noon to 4 p.m. at the Connecticut Historical Society in Hartford, celebrating ''Hartford Heroes: Two Centuries of the Hartford Fire Department.''
Safety demonstrations for children include a crawl through a (simulated) smoke-filled house. Several fire engines will be boardable with firefighters in attendance, and visitors may take guided tours of the society's museum and library collections of firefighting artifacts, including a section of the city's former water main: a hollow chestnut log.
Janet Marinelli, director of publications at the Brooklyn Botanical Garden, will speak at the Connecticut College Arboretum on her vision for the individual home as miniature preserve on an ever more crowded planet. Her talk is scheduled on Friday from 7 to 9 p.m. in the Olin Science Center Auditorium.
In her book, ''Stalking the Wild Amaranth: Gardening in the Age of Extinction,'' Ms. Marinelli constructs a managed ecological system that she believes will compensate for the loss of nature in the wild.
Small home landscapes will contain their own refuges consisting of a wetland and a bog, which receives a bonus of water from the house gutters; a meadow and a micro-savanna with one tree, maintaining 120 species of birds, 14 butterflies, 4 mammals; and many invertebrates.
Mystic Seaport's 21st annual Sea Music Festival begins on Thursday at the Garde Arts Center in New London with film footage of storms at sea, whaling in an open boat, and photographs and paintings illustrating maritime music. The festival will continue at the Seaport on Friday through next Sunday along the banks of the Mystic River, on stage and in the dozens of historic buildings and boats that make up the Seaport museum.
Afternoon and evening concerts, workshops and children's performances will be held on the grounds; late-night pub sings and a New England contra dance will take place at nearby taverns and dance halls.
Tickets to the Garde are $22, included in the $60 four-day pass. Daily admission is $16, evening concerts are $20, with discounts for children from 6 through 12. For more information call (888) 973-2767.
The Greenwich Kennel Club's 68th Annual American Kennel Club All-Breed Dog Show and Obedience Trials will be held on Saturday from 8:30 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. on the grounds of the State University of New York in Purchase, N.Y. Some 2,300 dogs will compete.
Finally, 10 authors -- among whose books are ''Hairless Dogs, the Naked Truth,'' ''How to Get Your Pet Into Show Business,'' ''The Good Shepherd,'' ''Grrr'' and ''The Cornell Book of Cats'' -- will be on hand to autograph copies of their books.
In November of last year the Connecticut Impressionist Art Trail was designated a Millennium Legacy Trail by the White House Millennium Council. One of 50 trails in 47 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, the Connecticut trail is the only one dedicated to a movement in art history. Ten venues that exhibit American Impressionist art make up the Connecticut trail and could form the basis for an art lover's automobile tour. They are the Bruce Museum in Greenwich and the Bush-Holley Historic Site in the Cos Cob section of Greenwich; the Weir Farm National Historic Site in Wilton, once the home of the painter J. Alden Weir; the Yale University Art Gallery in New Haven, the Florence Griswold Museum in Old Lyme, the Lyman Allyn Art Museum at Connecticut College in New London, the Wadsworth Atheneum and the art collection of the Hartford Steam Boiler Inspection and Insurance Company, both in Hartford; the Hill-Stead Museum in Farmington; and the New Britain Museum of American Art in New Britain.
The insides of our houses are examined in a new exhibition called ''Insites: Interior Spaces in Contemporary Art,'' on view at the Whitney Museum of American Art in Stamford through Aug. 23. More than 40 works in a variety of mediums connect domestic rooms to social, economic, aesthetic and gender issues.
Realistic for the most part, but enigmatic, the paintings and photographs take a few minutes to absorb. A baby nurse stands in a bedroom smiling at the sight of her young charge being handled by her mother lying on the bed, and another woman. So? The wallpaper, bedspreads, draperies, valance and painted bureau bear the same stultifying blue-on-white design.
Three videos interpreting interiors will be shown on June 15 and June 29 at 6 p.m. The museum is on the corner of Atlantic Street and Tresser Boulevard and is open free of charge Tuesday through Saturday from 11 to 5. Free gallery talks are given Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday at 12:30. The number to call for more information is (203) 358-7641
