IF I were to name the three most precious resources of life, I should say books, friends, and nature," the naturalist John Burroughs wrote in 1908. "And the greatest of these, at least the most constant and always at hand, is nature." Tell that to New Yorkers. The city may have more than its share of green spaces, but face it -- when you can take a break from a walk to grab a hot dog, you're nowhere near nature. The Mianus River Gorge Preserve, a short drive north, is among the closest places to get away from the city and into the woods.
The 753-acre preserve largely in Westchester County (with a small part over the line in Connecticut) is far from a typical forest, though. Created in late 1953, it became the first land preservation project of the Nature Conservancy in 1955. The gorge was later designated by the National Park Service as one of the country's first National Natural Landmarks. A kind of living conservation museum, it's a perfect place for a laid-back day hike, especially at this time of year as the air cools and leaves begin to color.
The hourlong drive north on congested parkways, past sprawling Co-op City in the Bronx and under old stone overpasses, hardly feels like a respite from the city. But once you are off the highway in Bedford, the scenery shifts abruptly. Tall stands of trees replace tree-shaped cellphone towers. A white-fenced horse farm stretches out from the road. This looks more like it.
After you make a few turns onto increasingly quiet roads, the Mianus River, which begins in western Connecticut and winds through parts of New York State on its way to Long Island Sound near Cos Cob, Conn., flows over a small dam next to an old mill house. A packed-dirt road runs along the river and through a tunnel of overhanging hardwoods to the preserve's entrance.
In the middle of a sun-drenched day several weeks ago, fewer than a dozen cars sat in the small parking area. According to Rod Christie, the executive director, the preserve has only about 7,000 to 10,000 visitors a year (it's open only in warmer months). "I don't discourage people from coming, obviously," Mr. Christie said. "But in the other respect, I don't put up big signs on the road that say Mianus River Gorge Preserve."
There are plenty of small signs, though. "No Dogs No Bikes on Trails," reads one in yellow block letters. "You are a guest in a private Preserve," says another, adding, almost sternly, "This is not a public park."
The five-mile system of trails starts just to the left of a map shelter, which displays a large hand-painted layout of the preserve. After only a few steps, the slow and slender river comes into view. The well-maintained trail, with mossy rocks and tree limbs lining its edges, traces the river on and off near the beginning of the trek, sunlight filtering down through fanning branches of birches and oaks. Ferns of many kinds -- royal, New York, Christmas, hayscented -- love the cool, moist air of the shadowy gorge, and thrive in patches all around.
Before long, the trail enters the oldest part of the preserve, 60 acres known as the hemlock cathedral. Thick with the towering 350-year-old trees, their splintered branches kaleidoscoping up into the canopy, this steeply sloped patch was left virtually untouched when farmers cleared the area for orchards and paddocks as early as the 18th century. The trees were also spared later when the land was logged because hemlocks do not make good lumber; only their bark, used for tanning, was valuable.
Development continued to encroach in the early 1950's, when a dam that would have flooded the gorge was planned. Nearby residents mounted a resistance and succeeded in having the dam redesigned to spare the gorge. Only a few months later, though, developers tried to buy the land. The neighborhood mobilized again. Savings were pooled and life insurance policies cashed in, and the down payment for the land was raised just before the deadline. More money was assembled through the newly formed Nature Conservancy to finance the preserve. Since then, it has grown in bits and pieces, combining nearly 80 parcels of land overall in its present form.
The preserve now is at least as much natural laboratory as recreational area. Hiking the trails, visitors see only a sliver of the place. The rest, Mr. Christie explained, is reserved for research. Coyote genotyping, forest restoration and invasive-species studies are a few of the projects at the preserve. The coyotes are fairly rare, but they are there; otters, fishers (relatives of weasels), bobcats, bears and even moose have been seen, too, Mr. Christie said. More common are deer and many kinds of birds -- hence the strict policies on dogs.
Near the hemlock cathedral, the gorge narrows and the trail winds along the river before sidling up to craggy stone walls that centuries ago marked farmers' property lines and held their livestock. The trail climbs upward, and hawks' screeches fall like leaves from the canopy. A small plane crosses overhead now and then, interrupting the quiet.
Soon comes a split-off to an abandoned quarry. Though it was nearly picked clean long ago, small bits of mica still glint off the ground near chunks of pink and white quartz. Not much farther is another side trail where a break in the trees reveals a distant slice of the Samuel J. Bargh Reservoir, which swallows the river for a time and supplies some of the nearby area with drinking water.
Back on the main trail, a spit of water crosses the path and steps down a series of small waterfalls. After a heavy fall rain, when the water level goes up in the gorge, the water gushes by boulders that make for nice seats. It's not far from here to the abrupt ending of the trail at a large beech tree on the shore of the reservoir -- its smooth gray bark is scarred with names and dates including "Elvis" and "81." Herons glide by, scanning the water's surface. Much of the two-and-a-half-mile return trip follows the same trail before reaching the parking lot, where in autumn the winterberry bushes are dotted with bright red berries.
The berries may look tempting, but they're strictly off-limits (and poisonous). A good lunch is easy to find in nearby Mount Kisco. After a day of hiking, it's probably a good idea to avoid anywhere with white tablecloths. A good choice is the authentic Mexican food at Azteca in the town's quaint center. Half grocery and half restaurant, its vibe is just right. Try the pollo con mole poblano ($9.95) or tacos with sliced pork ($2 each) or -- even better -- tongue ($2.50). About the time you've finished your meal and slipped back onto the highway toward the city, you begin to realize how far away you've been.
THE Mianus River Gorge Preserve (167 Mianus River Road, Bedford, N.Y.; 914-234-3455; www.mianus.org), about 45 miles north of Midtown Manhattan, covers areas of Bedford, North Castle and Pound Ridge in New York, and Stamford in Connecticut. A map of the trails, which are open from April to the end of November from 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. daily, is online. Hiking the entire five miles takes about three hours.
The closest Metro-North Railroad stations are miles away in Mount Kisco and Bedford Hills, so public transportation is not a good option. By car from the Bronx, take the Hutchinson River Parkway north and continue to Interstate 684. From Exit 4, turn right onto South Bedford Road (Route 172), then left on Old Post Road and right on Long Ridge Road. After turning right on Millers Mill Road, you'll be at the Mianus River and Mianus River Road, which leads to the preserve's entrance.
A version of this article appears in print on October 6, 2006, on Page F00009 of the National edition with the headline: DAY TRIP; Afoot in a Forest That's Partly Primeval. Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe
