The Philadelphia semiconductor index, the closely watched index of 30 semiconductor companies, has fallen about 16 percent in May, its worst monthly showing since the financial crisis, as the growing dispute takes a toll on companies reliant on China for business. Shares of Qualcomm, Micron, Nvidia and Broadcom are all down by even more. By comparison, the S&P 500 is down about 4 percent.
President Trump, emboldened by the strength of the United States economy, has escalated his fight with Beijing in recent weeks. He raised tariffs on Chinese goods and restricted American firms from selling components and technology to Huawei. China, in turn, raised tariffs of its own and has shown no signs of backing down.
China accounted for 35 percent of global semiconductor sales, according to Evercore ISI. Huawei, alone, spent $11 billion buying components and other supplies from American companies last year, said Joe Kelly, a Huawei spokesman.
But by Monday, after the Trump administration’s blacklisting of Huawei, major American semiconductor makers such as Qualcomm, Intel and Broadcom had started to step back from their dealings with the Chinese company.
Even before the latest escalation, the semiconductor makers were feeling the impact of the trade war as well as a slowing global economy. Profits for chip makers in the S&P 500 fell 21 percent during the first quarter, among the worst showings by any industry group within the index, according to FactSet.
But as the trade tensions cooled during the first few months of this year and a deal appeared near, shares of chip makers soared. By late April, the semiconductor index was up 37 percent to a record high, while the S&P 500 had gained about 17 percent.
That rally in chip stocks also highlighted a simple reality: While they are likely to continue to be buffeted by the ups and downs of the trade negotiations, semiconductors increasingly power the products and technology that are crucial to our daily lives and future, from the chips in iPhones and the latest-generation cellular networks to self-driving cars and artificial intelligence.
