While American inspectors have yet to wrap up their work in Iraq, there is already an enormous gap between the alarming intelligence assessments prepared before the war and the more modest weapons programs the inspectors have actually uncovered so far.
This is not a dispute among specialists but an issue that raises fundamental questions about the quality of American intelligence and its role in shaping foreign policy. A nation that has embarked on a policy of military pre-emption to neutralize new dangers requires the most reliable and accurate intelligence. It can literally be a matter of war and peace.
Regardless of when the Bush administration made up its mind that Saddam Hussein had to go, it was able to bring the country and Congress along because of intelligence assessments indicating that Iraq was making chemical and biological weapons and actively pursuing nuclear arms.
Start with the unclassified version of the October 2002 National Intelligence Estimate on Iraq, which circulated within the administration and was made available to lawmakers before the war. It can be found on the Web site of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, which has done a stellar job of compiling government reports and expert assessments on the subject. The report is posted at ceip.org .
The estimate not only asserts that Iraq had programs to develop weapons of mass destruction — or, as President Bush put it in this year's State of the Union address, "weapons of mass destruction-related program activities" — it also says that Iraq actually possessed stockpiles of chemical and germ weapons and was manufacturing more.
"We assess that Baghdad has begun renewed production of mustard, sarin, cyclosarin and VX," said the estimate, which asserted that Iraq had stockpiled at least 100 tons of chemical agents, and as much as 500 tons, adding much of it over the previous year.
The estimate noted that there were important differences within the intelligence community over Iraq's nuclear efforts: the State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research was so dubious about the nuclear claims, including the assertion that aluminum tubes sought by Iraq were for a nuclear program, that it stated a vigorous dissent.
While that view was included in the National Intelligence Estimate, the document also noted that most American intelligence organizations believed that there was compelling evidence that Iraq was reconstituting its nuclear program. The estimate stated that it had "high confidence" that "Iraq is continuing, and in some areas expanding, its chemical, biological, nuclear and missile programs contrary to U.N. resolutions."
The estimate also offered this ominous warning: "We judge that we are seeing only a portion of Iraq's W.M.D. efforts, owing to Baghdad's vigorous denial and deception efforts." In other words, it is probably worse than we think.
The agency says that it is now reviewing this prewar intelligence, but so far it has provided little indication that it understands where it went wrong. Its analysts still insist that their method was solid, even though it appears to have yielded some seriously wrong answers.
"No reasonable person could have viewed the totality of the information that the intelligence community had at its disposal — literally millions of pages — and reached any conclusions or alternative views that were profoundly different from those that we reached," Stu Cohen, the acting chairman of the National Intelligence Council at the time of the 2002 National Intelligence Estimate, asserted last November. His statement is available at the C.I.A. Web site .
The American inspectors who have been combing Iraq since Mr. Hussein was toppled, and who are formally known as the Iraq Survey Group, have found no evidence that Iraq was making chemical or germ weapons when the United States was debating whether to go to war.
The inspectors have found no supplies of poison gas or germ weapons, though David Kay, who recently left his post as the head of the group, has reported that Iraq was actively working to produce a biological weapon using the poison ricin.
Iraq had a nuclear program, Mr. Kay noted, but it was not nearly as far along as American intelligence had indicated. In other words, Mr. Kay's team has now determined that Iraq was up to no good but that the threat was not nearly as great or as urgent as the National Intelligence Estimate had indicated.
There are a number of reasons why United States intelligence was off base. Iraq did have ample stocks of chemical and germ weapons before the Persian Gulf War in 1991. Its nuclear program then was more advanced than American intelligence thought at the time. Having been caught short before on the nuclear threat, American intelligence may have erred on the high side this time.
Iraq also cheated on its disarmament obligations after the 1991 conflict, a fact brought home in 1995, when Iraq was caught smuggling gyroscopes for its missile program. Even as the 2003 Iraq war approached, Mr. Hussein declined to cooperate fully with the United Nations, which was never able to conduct private interviews with Iraqi scientists.
The rationale behind Mr. Hussein's policy can only be guessed at. He may have been calculating that he could cooperate enough to forestall a United Nations-sanctioned invasion, keeping open his options to resume his weapons programs after the world became preoccupied with some other crisis.
Kenneth M. Pollack, a former C.I.A. expert who argued for military action against Iraq before the war, outlines a variation of this thesis in a trenchant essay regarding the intelligence on Iraq in The Atlantic magazine and available at theatlantic.com .
Or Mr. Hussein may have wanted to maintain some ambiguity over the status of his weapons efforts to keep Iraq's Shiites at bay and deter foreign adversaries. As Hans Blix, the former chief United Nations inspector quipped, you can hang a sign on your door that says "Beware of Dog," but that does not mean you have a dog.
Or, as Mr. Kay has speculated, Mr. Hussein — and by extension foreign intelligence agencies — may have been deceived by a corrupt bureaucracy into thinking that his weapons programs were alive and well when they were in a state of disarray.
But that is not the message in the National Intelligence Estimate. While inspectors try to unravel the W.M.D. mysteries in Iraq, the experts have already begun to speculate about what happened at the C.I.A. and other intelligence agencies. Mr. Kay has argued that the C.I.A. lost a valuable source of intelligence when United Nations weapons inspectors left Iraq in 1998 and then, under pressure to come up with a conclusion, it overinterpreted the data gathered from satellites and other technical means.
That is just his theory, but it is hard to argue about his contention that an independent assessment of the agency's performance is needed. Once the record is established, it may make sense to undertake bureaucratic reforms to make the director of Central Intelligence more of an independent figure, a point made by a new study by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace on "W.M.D. in Iraq," which is available at ceip.org .
This is not an issue that should divide hawks and doves. A tough counter-proliferation strategy, which includes the option of using military force, is only as good as the intelligence it draws on. The dubious intelligence on Iraq has also cast a shadow over the agency's assessments of North Korea and other weapon states, undermining the American effort to highlight problems in other nations. So an independent look at the agency's methods is important for preserving the C.I.A.'s credibility in these areas as well.
The White House has resisted calls for an independent commission, apparently fearing that this would keep the W.M.D. issue alive during the election season. But there is precedent for an outside review of such matters. During the Clinton administration, Republican lawmakers began to push for a fresh look at efforts by North Korea and other nations to develop long-range missiles and at American intelligence assessments of such potential threats. A bipartisan commission was established in 1998 to delve into the matter. Paul D. Wolfowitz, now the deputy secretary of defense, was a member, and the panel was chaired by Donald H. Rumsfeld, now the defense secretary.
A former intelligence official once told me how he managed to survive Washington's bureaucratic wars. When forced to make an assessment on the basis of fragmentary information, he said, it is better to err on the side of overstating an adversary's capabilities. If the foe turns out to be less of a threat than originally thought, the politicians and the public will be relieved. But if the enemy turns out to be more formidable than expected, the critics will be hollering that the United States has been caught flat-footed because of yet another "intelligence failure."
As a guideline for interagency maneuvering, the precept was easy to understand. But as the Iraq case demonstrates, overestimating an enemy's strength can in fact be as big a problem as underestimating it. We know that it happened, but unless there is an independent inquiry, we may never learn why.
