“The world of computing is expanding beyond the personal computer,” Intel’s chief executive, Paul Otellini, said in the keynote address at the Intel Developer Forum on Tuesday. “We’re building out a spectrum of computing devices … all the way down to handheld. For consumers we want to deliver the same experience across any device.”
At the chip level, this means building most of a device’s functions into just one or two chips. The largest integration leap was a chip for digital televisions, introduced Thursday. The CE 4100 chip packs an Intel Atom processor, a graphics processor, and silicon for handling video, networking and many of the typical PC connection technologies — like the Universal Serial Bus, or USB — all into one chip.
The design, referred to generally as system-on-a-chip, is crucial because it’s a template for Intel’s push into mobile phones and small Internet devices in 2010 and 2011 — two markets that are currently dominated by other chipmakers like Texas Instruments and Samsung. A version of this design will be used next year in a high-end smartphone from LG Electronics.
“The importance is that Intel is using its integration ability to target wider markets,” said Dan Hutcheson, chief executive of VLSI Research. “They can integrate so many transistors now that they put loads of functionality into a single chip, which means that they can address a lot larger market with a single design.”
Looking at the more immediate future, Intel showed PC technology that is expected to find its way into laptops by the beginning of next year. The chip maker will, for the first time, integrate a laptop’s graphics processing directly onto the central processor. This brings most of the core features of a PC into one chip package, which makes laptops more power efficient, leading to longer battery life while increasing performance. By contrast, rivals Nvidia and Advanced Micro Devices deliver the graphics function in a chip separate from the main PC processor.
Integration at this level has been done before in high-end cellphones but never in Intel-based laptops. This technology will be used in both netbooks — tiny laptops priced under $400 — and in mainstream laptops.
Intel wasn’t the only one putting on a technology show, however. Executives from Intel’s main rival, A.M.D., were parked about a block away in a hotel demonstrating — on a much smaller scale — their stable of mobile chips. A.M.D. has been targeting a laptop market segment just above netbooks called ultra-thin, where the machines typically cost $500 to $900. A.M.D. showed a 12-inch laptop from MSI that used two processing cores — versus one in Intel-based netbooks — that starts at about $500.
This A.M.D. silicon, in combination with a graphics chip from its ATI unit, offers better performance than netbooks while allowing PC makers to keep system prices low, according to Patrick Moorhead, vice president for advanced marketing at A.M.D.
Some analysts agree. “The things that take a long time — media-intensive things, face recognition on your photo album — you don’t need a fast (Intel) processor if the graphics chip can be utilized,” said Nathan Brookwood of Insight 64.
The challenge for A.M.D., however, is how to fend off the hyper-aggressive Intel, which is now pushing ultrathins, too. Intel had a prominent display at the conference of about a dozen laptops that were less than an inch thick and typically weighed about three pounds.
The focus of the conference wasn’t just silicon, however. Intel showed an optical interconnect technology, called Light Peak, that will connect laptops, high-definition displays, televisions, cameras, and iPods to each other using optical fiber, rather than copper wires. The goal is to replace the relatively thick cables and bulky connectors hanging off today’s PCs with smaller — and fewer — connectors and thinner, more flexible cables that can handle more data.
How, and when, this will be done by device makers isn’t clear, but an Intel executive vice president, David Perlmutter, said that all of the cable connectors around the edge of a laptop today were an obstacle to making smaller computers.
Intel was also pushing its software: Moblin, a Linux-based operating system for small devices. Renee James, corporate vice president and general manager of the Intel Software and Services Group, introduced a new Intel developer program for the Atom processor on Wednesday with the hope of improving software adoption on netbooks and other devices. Asustek, Acer, and Dell are supporting the program.
Mr. Otellini of Intel, just before the conference, also had to contend with the European Commission’s release of embarrassing e-mail messages it obtained in the commission’s antitrust investigation of Intel. The e-mail messages depict alleged deals that Intel cut with Dell and other PC makers and comes after a May 13 decision against Intel that imposed a fine of roughly $1.45 billion against the chip giant for alleged antitrust behavior. Intel appealed the decision in July to a European court, saying that “evidence was ignored or misinterpreted.”
“I think they have consistently ignored information,” Mr. Otellini said in a question-and-answer session at the conference. He referred to the released information as “salacious e-mails” and added that “the characterization of … Dell in the documents was wrong.”
I remember way back (i.e. the ATI Mach 32, Tseng ET4000, S3 etc.), when the video chipset was not just seperate from the microprocessor, but also built on a seperate “adapter card”, be it PCI, AGP or even the really old vesa local bus, at and even xt bus architectures. Putting the chip set INSIDE the processor may save a few bucks, but what happens when you want to disable for example, to install a high performance video card ?. It used to be you would just swap out video cards, and sometimes you’d have to make a few firmware/OS changes (i.e. refresh rate, resolution, video driver), and even mother boards that came with “built in video” chip sets could be modified via the bios to accept external video adapter cards. If the chip set is now IN the CPU, then it becomes a much more difficult matter to modify these parameters. Also, when your given such a device, the limitations for that CPU may also affect future upgrades (is the built in video VGA/SVGA ?, if so whats the maximum resolution that can be obtained ?) External video cards now routinely have over 128 MB of ram built onto them, would thier be space on the cpu for all that vidoe memory ?. A lot of people like to take thier laptops home and plug them into a much larger monitor (and full size 101 keyboard), if the laptop cpu/video combo does not have the high resolution capability that large monitors can take advantage of, then these devices would leave little to be desired.
Is Apple an ARM licensee, and what is Apple’s PA Semiconductor doing with ARM SOC for the tablet next year, will it replace Intel with ARM for its computers (iPhone and iPods use ARM not Intel)? ARM just announced a 45nm SOC that is very competitive with the Intel 45nm SOC using Atom. How much is Intel paying the Taiwanese netbook makers and handset manufacturers to use Intel architecture instead of ARM? Intel has not been known for RISC, low power, and low cost like ARM, so it will be fascinating to watch this battle at the intersection of computers and mobile phones.
The connectors around the edge of a notebook aren’t in the way of making the product smaller nearly so much as the fact that people can’t type on tiny keyboards or read tiny screens easily for long periods of time. An iPhone has more processing power than a notebook computer from 10+ years ago, but I wouldn’t want to do all my work on it.
The nations of the EU are notorious coddler’s and supporters of “national champions” that compete have the potential to compete globally. The EU is also ridden by national monopolies fenced of from outside competition.
There are many hundreds of billions of dollars in monopoly, monopsony and oligopoly “rents” collected by EU firms that are political no go zones for the EU competition commissioner. Whilst some respect can be given to the competition commissioner for having developed some real teeth in recent times, it’s preponderance for mostly biting American technology companies, an area that the EU is not a global leader, smacks of bias, and industrial policy by other means.
The Koreans are even worse. The Cheabol and the Korean state have worked hand in glove to build these companies. Korean regulators have been utterly toothless in dealing with Hyundai, Samsung and LG extraordinary monopolistic practices within Korea.
I have no problems with the EU regulators aggressively targeting monopolists, but they have to apply these standards across the board, and not selectively or industry specific. Otherwise it is a legitimate issue for inclusion in WTO negotiations, or for some retaliatory practices by the U.S.
Unfortunately, this portends to further the social ‘norm’ that has developed, being that we should replace obsolete hardware on a regular basis. And we can continue to ship the obsolete hardware off in freighters to 3rd world countries, it would presume.
Perhaps it is simply a matter of US news outlets not feeling the stories would be interesting, but do the EU regulators undertake review of EU companies with such vigor? It certainly feels like the EU regulators are very “fond” of anti-trust actions against US companies, particularly when those companies don’t have especially strong EU presence (eg jobs).
