As expected, Allied Signal Inc., the diversified manufacturer, and Honeywell Inc., the Minneapolis-based maker of electronic controls, will announce today that they will merge, in a stock swap valued around $14 billion.
The deal will create a company with $25 billion in annual sales and a market capitalization in excess of $45 billion. The combined company will be called Honeywell International, and will be based in Morristown, N.J., Allied's current headquarters.
Under the terms, people close to the negotiations said, Honeywell shareholders will receive Allied Signal stock valued at a 4.2 percent premium over their existing shares, based on Friday's closing prices. Honeywell's shares surged by 9.5 percent on Friday after reports of a possible deal circulated.
Today's expected announcement would be the culmination of three months of secret talks between Lawrence A. Bossidy, Allied's chairman, and Michael R. Bonsignore, Honeywell's chief executive. According to people close to the talks, the two men met several times in hotels in New York and Chicago -- and pretty much anyplace except Minneapolis or Morristown, where their presence would inevitably be noticed.
Mr. Bonsignore and Mr. Bossidy had talked on and off about a merger for several years, but had never come up with a deal that both thought acceptable. People close to the talks intimated that Mr. Bonsignore felt that Honeywell would lose more than it would gain from a merger.
But this time, Mr. Bossidy was still smarting from the failure of his $10 billion hostile run at AMP Inc., the electrical-connector company that merged with Tyco International last year. And his retirement, scheduled for April 2000, was looming without an obvious successor in sight. So, a new spirit of compromise entered the picture. ''This was the first time the talks got to this level of detail,'' someone close to the process said.
The deal they hammered out, in fact, represents major compromises for both companies. After 114 years of calling Minneapolis home, Honeywell must move its headquarters to Morristown. And Allied will see its name disappear altogether.
For now, Mr. Bossidy will be chairman of the combined company, and Mr. Bonsignore will be its chief executive. Mr. Bonsignore, 58, will add the chairman's title when Mr. Bossidy retires. Robert D. Johnson, currently president of Allied's aerospace group, and Giannantonio Ferrari, Honeywell's president, will share the chief operating officer's slot. Fred Poses, Allied's president, will leave the company.
Technically, the deal looks more like an acquisition than a merger. In size, Honeywell, with 1998 revenue of $8.4 billion, is dwarfed by Allied, which had revenue of $15.1 billion last year. Mr. Bonsignore and Mr. Bossidy will be the only inside directors on the new board, but eight of the outside directors now sit on Allied's board, while only five will move over from Honeywell.
Under the terms of the deal, Honeywell shareholders will get 1.875 share of Allied Signal stock for each share of Honeywell they own. Based on Friday's closing price, that would value each Honeywell share at $109.45. Honeywell's stock soared $9.125 on Friday, to $105. But Allied's shares dropped $2 to $58.375.
Still, from a strategic standpoint, it is a merger of equals. The combined company will have huge businesses in aerospace and chemical products, as well as smaller businesses in automotive parts and building controls. Allied is already a big supplier of materials to chemical companies; Honeywell is a major supplier of process controls to those same customers. Allied is a leading supplier of safety instruments to airlines, while Honeywell is a leader in cockpit displays for aircraft manufacturers. By merging their aerospace businesses, they will create a $10.5 billion business with customers in both the plane manufacturing and airline worlds, which operate on different business cycles.
Moreover, both executives have been emphasizing services over tangible products in all their businesses. People close to the companies say that Honeywell International hopes to derive half of its revenue from repair operations and other services.
A merger integration team, made up of executives from both companies, is already trying to figure out the quickest way to bring Honeywell people up to speed on Six Sigma, a complicated statistical quality-control method that has radically reduced product defects and administrative costs at Allied Signal.
The team has also begun working out details for cutting a total of $500 million in annual costs by 2002, people close to the talks said. After the expected job cuts, the combined company will eventually have a work force of about 120,000 employees. The job cuts may hit hardest in Minneapolis, where Honeywell will maintain factory operations but will close its headquarters. About 800 corporate employees will probably be let go there, people close to Honeywell said.
The company expects to reap additional savings through combined research operations, taxes and the companywide application of Six Sigma. It also expects that its combined purchasing strength will yield better prices from its suppliers. ''Together, they purchase $10.2 billion a year, so purchasing is an easily recognizable target for cost cuts,'' a person close to the talks said. Indeed, by 2002 Honeywell International expects savings to add 32 cents to earnings a share.
The people close to the talks said the company's goals were to increase per-share earnings by more than 15 percent a year, to expand sales 8 to 10 percent a year, and to have $2 billion in free cash flow by 2002.
Honeywell was advised by Bear, Stearns and the law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom. Allied Signal was advised by J. P. Morgan and the law firm of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson.
