BRUSSELS — In his three months in power, Prime Minister Boris Johnson has yet to win a major vote in Parliament. But that will no longer matter to him and his backers if he can pull out a victory in Saturday’s vote on his new Brexit deal with the European Union. He was on the phone Friday lobbying, cajoling and pleading with lawmakers, knowing that the outcome is likely to turn on just a handful of votes.
Although the first rule of politics is supposed to be — in the words of President Lyndon B. Johnson — learning to count, the math this time is hard. Parliament voted three times against a plan brought forth by Mr. Johnson’s predecessor, Theresa May — the last time by 58 votes. So Mr. Johnson in theory needs around 30 lawmakers to change sides in order to give him the magic number of 320 votes for victory.
But this is a different deal and he is likely to lose some who voted for Mrs. May’s last plan, so the numbers are fluid. The decision of 10 lawmakers from the Democratic Unionist Party of Northern Ireland to oppose his blueprint was a blow to Mr. Johnson, though not necessarily a fatal one.
“Honestly, I am completely torn. I struggle with it all the time,” said Rory Stewart, one of 21 members of Parliament expelled from the Conservative Party last month for defying Mr. Johnson by trying to prevent Britain from leaving the European Union without an agreement.
“The temptation would be to say I reject it because Theresa May’s deal is better,” Mr. Stewart said. “But at the same time, realistically, Theresa May’s deal is not coming back. So if you reject this, what are you really laying yourself open for? No deal, second referendum or endless delay.”
To add to the sense of confusion, Parliament might be asked on Saturday to consider an amendment put forward by Oliver Letwin, a lawmaker who was expelled from the Conservatives for defying Mr. Johnson over Brexit. It would withhold approval of the Brexit deal until Parliament passed legislation to enact it. That condition would force Mr. Johnson to ask the European Union for a further postponement of the Brexit deadline, to Jan. 31.
Most lawmakers are entrenched on one side or the other of the Brexit debate, so the outcome may be decided by three critical blocs: the “Spartans” and other hard-line, pro-Brexit Tories, and rebels from both major parties, the Conservatives and Labour.
These are the 28 hard-line pro-Brexit Conservative lawmakers who voted against Mrs. May’s last attempt to get her deal through Parliament (and are a subset of the so-called European Research Group, which has around 80 members). If the Spartans can be persuaded to back Mr. Johnson’s deal, they will get him close to the line since the rest of the larger group is expected to largely support the plan.
Their leader, Steve Baker, made it clear on Friday that no decision would be made until just before the vote on Saturday. Whether they will vote as a bloc is unclear, but many are thought likely to support Mr. Johnson.
The D.U.P. is pressuring them not to abandon them this time around, saying that Mr. Johnson’s deal threatens to split the United Kingdom by creating a different trade system for Northern Ireland than for the rest of the country.
But there are signs of widening cracks. In particular, Brexit hard-liners seem to be increasingly susceptible to Mr. Johnson’s argument that if they reject his deal, they could end up risking their whole project, through a second Brexit referendum or an election that empowers the opposition Labour Party.
Mr. Johnson can also argue that, realistically, they have no better prospect of getting such a clean break with the European Union, and that his agreement makes no binding promises to stay close to European Union rules and standards. Rather, it points to a very loose future trading relationship with the bloc.
Last month, Mr. Johnson threw 21 lawmakers out of the Conservative Party after they voted for a measure to stop a no-deal Brexit. But if a week is a long time in politics, a month or so is a lifetime, and Mr. Johnson is likely to hint that they could be welcomed back into the fold if they support him this time.
But many, like the former chancellor of the Exchequer, Philip Hammond, vastly preferred Mrs. May’s deal, which would have kept Britain far more closely aligned with the European Union. It will be hard for them to accept Mr. Johnson’s deal.
“It is genuinely a huge dilemma for many members of Parliament,” said Maddy Thimont Jack, a senior researcher at the Institute for Government, a think tank in London. “Quite a few would have preferred to vote for Theresa May’s deal, but that is not on the table anymore.”
Throughout the Brexit debate, the Labour Party has had to contend with a significant number of its lawmakers, particularly in the rust belt areas of England’s north and midlands, who represent districts that voted to leave.
A handful of Labour lawmakers voted for Mrs. May’s plan, and others could very well back Mr. Johnson’s, reflecting the country’s exhaustion with Brexit. But they are also defenders of the working class, so they could be put off by concerns that the new deal would weaken worker protections afforded under the European Union’s single market.
“For these conflicted Labour M.P.s, ‘Give me Brexit, but not yet,’ has always been the most appealing way out,” said Rob Ford, a professor of politics at the University of Manchester. “But the psychology feels rather different now. They’re reaching the point where they are fed up beyond breaking point, and their voters are even more fed up, and delay is perhaps looking less attractive.”
In the past, Labour has instructed its members in the strongest terms against backing a Tory Brexit deal — usually with the threat of banishment from the party — but then decided not to kick anyone out of the party in the end. Party leaders’ reticence on Friday suggested that could happen again.
