Greetings from Omaha where the Berkshire Hathaway annual meeting just wrapped up. I questioned Warren Buffett and Charlie Munger along with other journalists, analysts and shareholders. Here’s a cheat sheet to the day’s highlights. (Was this email forwarded to you? Sign up here.)
The biggest draw was again the marathon question-and-answer session with Mr. Buffett and Charles T. Munger, Berkshire’s vice chairman, about everything from the conglomerate’s business to the economy to politics and whatever else crossed their minds.
Mr. Buffett and Mr. Munger took a question on the misdeeds at Wells Fargo, which included deceiving customers with fake bank accounts, unwarranted fees and unwanted products. Berkshire holds a significant stake in the bank. The questioner asserted that Mr. Buffett had not been as critical of Wells Fargo as he had been many years earlier of Salomon Brothers, the Wall Street firm that was embroiled in a trading scandal in the early ‘90s. Berkshire had a large stake in Salomon.
On Saturday, in responding to the question, Mr. Buffett said, “When you find a problem you have to do something about it, and I think that’s where they probably made a mistake at Wells Fargo, and they made it at Salomon.” He also suggested that senior Wells Fargo officers overlooked an early report, by The Los Angeles Times, about some of the bank’s misconduct. “Somebody ignored that article,” he said.
Both Mr. Buffett and Mr. Munger said regulation could be irksome, but was necessary. Mr. Buffett noted that insurance, one of Berkshire’s biggest businesses, has long been subject to regulation. “Regulation can be a pain in the neck generally, but we don’t want a lot of charlatans operating in insurance,” he added.
Mr. Munger said banks enjoy implicit government backing through deposit insurance, so it is part of the bargain that banks have to operate under regulation. “You can’t be too crazy with the money,” he said.
Mr. Buffett did not answer the question directly. Instead, he said there was a constant battle between the brands that belong to retailers, like Costco’s Kirkland Signature, and those brands that belong to producers, like Kraft Heinz. Mr. Buffett said some retailers had “gained some power,” particularly Amazon, Walmart and Costco.
One criticism of the company is that its management, steered by 3G Capital, did not spend enough on marketing and developing products to try and attract consumers in a changing market. Mr. Munger disputed that, saying, “I don’t think the problem was that they cut research.”
Berkshire revealed on Saturday that Kraft Heinz was causing new headaches. Berkshire said its first quarter financial results did not reflect its share in Kraft Heinz’s earnings. The reason: Kraft Heinz had yet to file its annual financial results with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and it had not made its first quarter financial results available to Berkshire.
Berkshire shareholders have often questioned whether 3G’s management style is in step with Berkshire’s. Mr. Buffett has fostered a reputation for allowing the businesses that Berkshire purchases to operate with little interference and hasn’t pushed for big job cuts. 3G is known for its ruthless cost-cutting.
Mr. Buffett has defended 3G and Berkshire’s involvement with the firm. He has also pointed out that, like Berkshire, 3G doesn’t just look to buy and build businesses but also looks to hold them. He has argued that 3G and Berkshire don’t have contradictory views on cost-cutting, they only differ on the type of deals they pursue. 3G, Mr. Buffett has written, has acquired businesses that “offer an opportunity for eliminating many unnecessary costs.” Berkshire has typically avoided buying bloated companies.
It should be noted that 3G’s strategy of buying companies in need of a turnaround has also provided Berkshire with a new category of megadeals at a time when Berkshire has struggled to make large acquisitions.
Mr. Buffett, perhaps the most famous value investor, had famously avoided investing in tech companies for years because he didn’t understand them. But that stance seems to have evolved in recent years. Mr. Buffett told CNBC Friday that Berkshire had made its first investment in Amazon.
Todd Combs and Ted Weschler, the two investment managers whom Berkshire had hired in the past decade, are behind the push into tech stocks. Mr. Buffett credited the pair for Berkshire’s Amazon and Apple investments, but hasn’t said which one.
“The truth is that I’ve watched Amazon from the start, and I think what Jeff Bezos has done is something close to a miracle. The problem is if I think something will be a miracle, I tend not to bet on it.”
Capitalism has come under increasing criticism while support for socialism has grown in the United States. One shareholder wanted to know what Mr. Buffett, as a lifelong Democrat, thinks of these shifting views and whether they could affect Berkshire.
“I’ll just say it: I’m a card-carrying capitalist. You don’t have to worry about me changing in that matter. But I also think capitalism does involve regulation. It involves taking care of people who are left behind.”
“We will buy stock when it is trading below a conservative estimate of its intrinsic value,” he said. “We want to be sure when we repurchase stock that those that have not sold are better off than they were before.”
Mr. Buffett had largely eschewed buying back Berkshire stock. But as the price to acquire big companies rose over the past few years and Berkshire’s cash pile swelled, Mr. Buffett’s reluctance to buy back Berkshire’s stock began to fade.
The company was not alone. Flush with cash from the $1.5 trillion tax cut, American companies bought back a record $806 billion of their own shares in 2018. By reducing the number of shares outstanding, buybacks can bolster a company’s stock prices. And companies often buy back their shares when they believe they have nothing better to do with their money than return capital to shareholders.
One questioner asked whether Berkshire should have invested a large proportion of its more than $110 billion cash pile in a stock market index fund. Such a move could have produced significant extra returns for the company over the bull run of the past 10 years.
Mr. Buffett didn’t dismiss the idea, saying it might make sense in the future. But he added that having more than $100 billion available allowed Berkshire to take advantage of large investment opportunities when they come up.
A year ago, DealBook’s Andrew Ross Sorkin relayed a question from a shareholder about Mr. Musk’s assertion that “moats are lame.” It was a criticism of an economic principle that Mr. Buffett had articulated in 1999.
The short answer is that they are not too worried. Mr. Buffett said the likelihood of an auto company successfully getting into the insurance business was about as likely as insurance companies successfully getting into the auto business.
Asked if shareholders should expect more such deals, Mr. Buffett said yes. He then added, the deal was evidence that when companies need a lot of financing fast, Berkshire continues “to get the call,” and that this is something that is likely to continue.
The uncertainty surrounding Britain’s possible departure from the European Union, known as Brexit, appears to be reducing business investments in the country, but Mr. Buffett said on Saturday that he’d jump at the chance to do a big deal in Britain.
Will Berkshire be vulnerable to activists after Mr. Buffett and Mr. Munger are gone and their holdings are distributed? (Mr. Buffett has committed to gradually giving away much of his Berkshire stock to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.)
That has certainly been the case. On Saturday morning, Berkshire reported soaring earnings for the first quarter because of those accounting changes. The new rules require Berkshire to include in its earnings the gains and losses on the stocks it holds but has not sold.
In the first quarter, Berkshire’s earnings jumped to $21.7 billion, compared with a net loss of $1.14 billion a year earlier. Berkshire’s earnings last quarter were bolstered by a $15.1 billion gain in the company’s huge stock portfolio.
Given the new accounting rule, Mr. Buffett has urged shareholders to focus on the performance of Berkshire Hathaway’s broad array of companies, which include insurers, energy firms, railways and manufacturers.
