The field’s operators, led by the American giant Chevron, are defying conventional industry wisdom with an enormous expansion that they hope will increase production nearly 50 percent, to the rarefied mark of a million barrels a day. They expect the oil field to be vibrant for decades.
About 48,000 people, most of them Kazakhs, are working on the expansion, many living in dormitory-like buildings. Pieces of equipment weighing hundreds of tons — hulking sections of electric power stations and oil-processing units — arrive daily from factories in Italy, South Korea and Turkey. After a voyage through Russia’s inland waterways to a newly built port on the Caspian Sea, the segments are hauled about 40 miles to the oil field, where a 3,200-ton crane hoists them up and eases them into place.
The expansion is about three years from completion, but the Tengiz oil field already provides nearly a quarter of Kazakhstan’s national revenue, and about a quarter of Chevron’s profits. Chevron approved the project in 2016 at what may have seemed like an inopportune time: The world was awash in oil, and the industry was still reeling from a price collapse that had begun in 2014. Expanding the Tengiz operation appeared to be a good bet because the field had performed so well in the past and because Chevron places a high value on its relationship with Kazakhstan.
It begins with the weather. Ice on the Caspian can halt shipments of equipment, idling thousands of workers. Chevron has had good luck so far, officials said, and the project is more than half finished.
Making progress at Tengiz also requires maintaining good relations with Moscow, which has not forgotten that Kazakhstan was a Soviet republic until the early 1990s. Russia looms over its neighbor along the 4,200-mile border they share, with equipment bound for Tengiz moving through Russia’s waterways and crude oil from Tengiz shipped through a Russian port on the Black Sea. It helps that the Russian company Lukoil is a partner in the joint venture, known as Tengizchevroil.
At some point, Kazakhstan could reconsider its relationship with Chevron and Exxon Mobil, the other American company involved in the expansion effort. Chevron has been careful to stay on government officials’ good side by engaging in frequent dialogue, but some analysts note that Kazakhstan is in the midst of a political transition after three decades under the same leader. The new government, analysts said, may decide that the terms of its decades-old agreement are too favorable to the oil companies and seek to rewrite it.
A continuing challenge is the hiring and training of tens of thousands of new workers. All of them must be fed, housed and transported with productivity in mind. “Do you have the ability to manage that effectively, efficiently, safely?” said Jim Mayeaux, the site manager assigned to the operation by Exxon Mobil.
For young Kazakh professionals, the project is a rare shot at the big time. Togzhan Abdeshova, 29, started working in Tengiz fresh out of college in 2011, before the expansion began, and is receiving engineering training from Chevron. “This experience will help us work at any other plants worldwide,” she said.
Expatriates like John Omelchenko, 58, a Chevron drilling supervisor known as Johnny O, are introducing the latest techniques to Tengiz. Flown in from Maryland, Mr. Omelchenko works weeks at a time: 28 days on, 28 days off.
He relishes the remote drilling sites, where pet dogs ward off foxes and wolves. But he said the long absences from home had been tough on his wife. “The car or the refrigerator are always breaking” in the months he is away, he said wryly.
Keeping the peace in an isolated work force of many ethnic backgrounds is another challenge. Kazakh workers have complained about inferior pay and working conditions compared with those of expatriates, and the concerns fed into a violent fracas in June that left 40 workers hurt.
Contractors pulled workers from the site, and management was forced to suspend operations. In the end, the locals were promised a 7 percent pay raise, said one contracting company official, and work slowly resumed.
The Tengiz project is expensive and tricky, but the most daunting risk may be broader concerns about fossil fuels’ role in climate change. In short, will demand for oil shrink before the full profits from the expansion flow? Barring recession, global oil consumption has tended to rise. But climate concerns are accelerating a shift toward alternative energy, and may eventually sap demand for oil.
Carbon Tracker, a nonprofit group that advises investors on risk, argues that future limits on oil consumption make it unlikely that Chevron can earn an acceptable return on the billions it is spending at Tengiz. Andrew Grant, a senior analyst at the group, said that the oil field expansion “amounts to a bet on the failure” of the world to keep temperatures within limits set by the Paris climate accord.
For Tengizchevroil, which is composed of Chevron, with a 50 percent stake; Exxon Mobil, at 25 percent; KazMunayGas, Kazakhstan’s national oil company, at 20 percent; and Lukoil, at 5 percent, the potential gains still outweigh the risks.
But Tengiz, which Soviet geologists discovered in the 1970s, is also more complicated than most other fields. Its oil comes out of the ground with a potentially fatal gas, hydrogen sulfide. Local oil people still talk about a towering well blowout in 1985 that spewed pollution for miles.
The need for huge installations to safely separate the oil from natural gas and hydrogen sulfide gave Chevron an opening when the Soviet Union crumbled in 1991. Nursultan Nazarbayev, who was Kazakhstan’s leader at the time and remained in the job until he retired in March, wanted to bring in a reliable operator to generate cash to bolster his fledgling independent country of 19 million people.
“It would have been very difficult to do this ourselves,” said Meiram Shldenov, a control room supervisor for Tengizchevroil. In 1993, Mr. Nazarbayev signed a 40-year contract with Chevron that began what most observers say has been a mutually beneficial relationship. Tengizchevroil is Kazakhstan’s largest taxpayer.
Mr. Nazarbayev’s handpicked successor, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, is now running the country, and Chevron’s top executive in the country seems sanguine. Eimear Bonner, who is Tengizchevroil’s general director, said that she saw no problems if Chevron continued to deliver on its promises to meet production targets and treat workers well.
Others are somewhat more guarded. Francisco Monaldi, a fellow at Rice University’s Baker Institute who has worked in Kazakhstan, said that “any transition in an authoritarian rule” could lead to political instability. That, he added, might push the government to grab a bigger share of the returns on investments like Chevron’s.
Ms. Bonner, a native of Northern Ireland, runs the joint venture from offices in Atyrau, the country’s oil capital, while her husband, an oil executive, stays home with their two daughters. She insisted that Chevron’s regular engagement with Kazakh officials and the steps the company was taking to fend off corruption, a major problem for businesses in Kazakhstan, were keeping the project on track.
Because the project is so crucial to Chevron’s future, the company has assembled a team of expatriate stalwarts to push it over the line. In addition, a team of biologists monitors the impact of excavation work on seals and birds. Although the steppes may seem barren, they nurture wildlife. Orange clouds of painted lady butterflies swarm there on their way to Northern Europe, and herds of wild horses roam among the oil installations.
