The hiring of Mr. Scharf, 54, makes good on a promise by Wells Fargo’s board this year to look outside the company for a leader who would help the bank break from its recent past. The previous chief executive — an internal hire promoted after the worst scandal in the bank’s history — stepped down in March after lawmakers in Congress grilled him over problems still plaguing an institution that once enjoyed a sterling reputation.
Mr. Scharf, who previously ran Visa, will take over on Oct. 21. He’ll try to rebuild trust with consumers and regulators that began to erode three years ago when Wells Fargo revealed it had opened millions of fake accounts in customers’ names.
It will be a monumental task. Wells Fargo has been operating under growth restrictions imposed by its regulators early last year in an effort to get the bank to root out bad management practices. The scrutiny has not abated: The bank’s previous chief executive, Timothy J. Sloan, resigned abruptly on March 28 after his punishing appearance in Congress.
Before spending two years as chief executive of Bank of New York and four years as head of Visa, Mr. Scharf held numerous top roles on Wall Street. He helped oversee JPMorgan Chase’s private investment arm and was chief executive of its retail financial services division. Earlier in his career, he was chief financial officer at Citigroup’s investment banking business.
“This is a real interesting career opportunity for him because of what it will do for his reputation if he is able to get his arms around what is happening at Wells,” said Bert Ely, a banking consultant. “This is the challenge of a lifetime.”
Wells Fargo was long the envy of the banking industry, able to avoid scandals that hit its competitors. But its reputation crumbled after the bank disclosed that employees had opened millions of accounts its customers had not requested. Regulators said many workers had felt pressured by a compensation policy that rewarded the opening of new accounts.
Wells Fargo fired more than 5,000 employees over the account scandal, but it was not the only blemish on the bank’s reputation. It was also accused of forcing customers to carry unnecessary car insurance and charging improper mortgage fees, and employees told The New York Times this year that they still felt pressure to squeeze extra money out of customers.
In August, The Times reported that Wells Fargo was continuing to charge some of its customers fees even after it had told them that their accounts were closed. That prompted Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, to call for a new round of investigations. Wells Fargo said it had begun an extensive review of its account-closing practices.
Kenneth Leon, an analyst at the Wall Street research firm CFRA, said Mr. Scharf’s first order of business was likely to be deciding which members of Wells Fargo’s senior leadership team to keep and which to replace. Mr. Leon said he expected that sort of change to be announced within three months.
Mr. Scharf’s initial pay package, which includes a base salary of $2.5 million and a $5 million cash incentive, could be worth as much as $27 million in cash and stock. That’s in the middle of the pay range set by his peers at other large United States banks. Last year, JPMorgan’s chief executive, Jamie Dimon, took home $31 million while David Solomon, Goldman Sachs’s new head, got $23 million.
At times during the search, the most likely candidate seemed to be C. Allen Parker, the general counsel, who was made interim chief executive when Mr. Sloan left. But that would have required going back on the board’s initial statement that it would look outside the organization, which was an apparent acknowledgment that promoting from within — as the bank did when Mr. Sloan replaced John G. Stumpf after the fake-account scandal — was not enough.
In a sign of the particular interest that Wells Fargo engenders, the bank’s main regulator, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, said it had informed the bank in writing that it did not object to the choice of Mr. Scharf.
