6:20 p.m. | Updated After more than a week of negotiations, Best Buy said on Monday that it had agreed to let its founder, Richard M. Schulze, take a closer look at its financial statements to help him hone his potential takeover proposal for the electronics retailer.
Both parties issued terse public statements during the talks as they jockeyed over terms of the due diligence period. Best Buy had sought to avoid having a prolonged fight with Mr. Schulze during the holiday season, which the company felt would be debilitating.
Earlier this month, Mr. Schulze proposed buying the company he founded 46 years ago for up to $8.8 billion. Best Buy, however, has been cautious in its response to his overtures. During its quarterly earnings announcement on Aug. 20, Best Buy outlined plans for a turnaround effort to be led by a new chief executive, Hubert Joly. Mr. Schulze and his potential partners and financial backers will gain access to Best Buy’s books immediately and will have 60 days to present a fully financed deal.
One of the sticking points had been the duration of any standstill agreement — specifically, how long Mr. Schulze would be prohibited from going fully hostile in his takeover attempt should the two side fail to reach a friendly deal.
The two parties agreed that Mr. Schulze would have to wait until January to make a second offer if the board rejected his first formal proposal. Company directors would then have 30 days to review the newer plan before Mr. Schulze, who already owns a 20 percent stake, could go directly to Best Buy’s shareholders. He could either make a proposal to be voted on at Best Buy’s annual investor meeting or call a special meeting with the support of 25 percent of stockholders.
Mr. Schulze, who started Best Buy as a music equipment store in 1966, has not yet outlined his turnaround strategy. This month, the electronics retailer reported a 91 percent drop in second-quarter profit, to $12 million, and said its same-store sales in the United States and overseas were down.
