As a result, the company is in a mess. It has an interim chief executive without retailing experience who is searching for a strategic plan while the board tries to decide whether to give him the job permanently or try to hire an outsider. The founder and former chairman, who lost his job as a result of the board’s decisions this year, is trying to put together an offer to take the company private.
Whoever gets the chief executive job will have a staff of top aides, none of whom the board evidently trusted to run the company, who have been given retention bonuses and employment contracts to keep them from leaving during the chaos.
But chief executives are mortal, and a board should have a plan for what will be done to keep the company running if the current boss is hit by a bus. That plan does not have to be public, or even known to the successor-in-waiting, but it should be there. And it should be reviewed on a regular basis.
Confronting that possibility can have positive results even if the current chief is destined to stay around for many years to come. If there is no one around who the board thinks could step into the top spot, it is time to look for more talent.
Late last year, Mr. Schulze, now 71, received a written statement from an employee “containing specific allegations about a possible inappropriate relationship” between Brian J. Dunn, the 51-year-old chief executive, and a 29-year-old female employee, according to a later report by the company’s audit committee.
Mr. Schulze confronted Mr. Dunn, who “adamantly denied any inappropriate conduct or romantic relationship with respect to the female employee.” Mr. Schulze accepted his word and viewed the matter as settled. He did not tell any of his fellow board members.
Alas, like many companies, Best Buy had written policies in force for how to deal with such a complaint. The decision was not supposed to be made by the chairman. It was the board’s audit committee that had the power to decide.
When the audit committee was told of the allegation by a company executive in March, it hired an outside law firm to conduct an investigation, which concluded that Mr. Dunn had acted inappropriately, even if he had not had a sexual relationship with the woman, as both he and the woman said was the case.
“The C.E.O. violated company policy by allowing his relationship with the female employee to negatively impact the work environment,” the committee stated, and “by placing his interest in the relationship ahead of company interests.” He had, among other things, asked a company vendor to provide the woman a free ticket for a concert in Las Vegas. He had to go.
And so, the board decided, did Mr. Schulze. He should have referred the case to the audit committee. He should not have told Mr. Dunn which employee had complained. After all, “improper handling of employee allegations discourages employees from reporting potentially improper behavior to their supervisors, adversely affects the company’s governance and inhibits its ability to run an effective ethical compliance program,” the board committee said.
The board tried to push Mr. Schulze aside with as much grace as possible. He was to be replaced as chairman after this year’s annual meeting, but could stay on the board until his term expired in 2013. He was given the title “founder and chairman emeritus,” and promised that he and his wife would still have company health insurance and an office at headquarters.
George L. Mikan III, 41, a board member and former insurance company executive, became the interim C.E.O. in April, and made clear he wanted the job permanently. He appears to have not had another full-time job when he assumed the post. Best Buy says he left the UnitedHealth Group in February, although the insurance company had announced his departure the previous summer. UnitedHealth at that time said he was leaving to “lead a private equity fund,” but Best Buy says the planned fund did not get off the ground before he took over the retailer.
In early June, two weeks before the company’s annual meeting, Mr. Schulze quit and directed a blast at his successors. “There is an urgent need for Best Buy to reinvigorate growth by reconnecting with today’s customers and building pathways to the next generation of consumers,” he said, adding that he planned “to explore all available options for my ownership stake.” The board named Hatim A. Tyabji, the chairman of its audit committee, as chairman. The company announcement called Mr. Schulze “an iconic entrepreneur.”
This week, the pretense of cooperation ended. Mr. Schulze said he wanted to lead a leveraged buyout of the company, and said Credit Suisse was “highly confident” that financing could be arranged. He said he would put as much as a billion dollars of his own money into the deal, and said he had talked to private equity firms about joining him.
For now, there is stalemate. The company says that unless and until Mr. Schulze organizes a group, there is no offer to respond to. Mr. Schulze says that announcing a group without board approval could run afoul of a Minnesota anti-takeover law — the company is based there — that would bar him from actually doing a deal for four years.
If he prevails, Mr. Schulze says, he will bring back the two executives who ran the company before Mr. Dunn. The company did well under them, but of course that was before Amazon became a fierce competitor.
The company will announce quarterly earnings in less than two weeks, and the expectation is that the figures will be way down from a year ago. The company has announced some plans, including store closings and an increased focus on Internet sales, and is expected to announce its full strategy soon. Meanwhile, the search for a permanent C.E.O. to carry out that strategy goes on. Best Buy declined to make Mr. Mikan, or any other member of the board, available for an interview.
The worst possibility of all for current shareholders might be for Mr. Schulze to find he could not raise the money for a deal. That would deliver a bad message about the company’s prospects. But the worst possibility for the company and its employees might be for him — or some white knight the company finds — to finance and complete such a deal, forcing Best Buy to slash spending just to meet debt payments at a time when revenue prospects are far from clear.
At the price Mr. Schulze is talking about, buying the company would cost about $10 billion. The assumption is that a billion of that would come from Mr. Schulze’s not selling all of his stock in the deal, and retaining an equity interest while taking out about $700 million. An additional $2 billion would come from private equity firms, and there would be $7 billion in new debt. Now there is about $1.7 billion in long-term debt.
There was no way for the board to know that Mr. Dunn would have to leave suddenly. But there was a way to plan for that possibility. The board’s failure to do so left the company in a very bad situation.
