"Since mid-September, rapid, seismic changes in consumer behavior have created the most difficult climate we've ever seen," the chief executive of Best Buy, Brad Anderson, said in a statement. "Best Buy simply can't adjust fast enough to maintain our earnings momentum for this year."
"In 42 years of retailing, we've never seen such difficult times for the consumer," the company's president and chief operating officer, Brian Dunn, said. "People are making dramatic changes in how much they spend, and we're not immune from those forces."
The company also faces increased competition from Wal-Mart Stores, which has stepped up its advertising on electronics like flat-panel televisions as a big part of its holiday push that emphasizes low prices.
Best Buy said comparable store sales fell about 7.6 percent in October after falling 1.3 percent in September. It said comparable store sales in November 2008 through February 2009 could decline by 5 percent to 15 percent, leading to an annual comparable store sales decline of 1 percent to 8 percent.
Best Buy forecast fiscal 2009 earnings of about $2.30 to $2.90 per share, down from a prior forecast of $3.25 to $3.40 per share. Analysts, on average, had expected it to earn $3.03 per share, according to Reuters Estimates.
"Typically consumer electronics would be a positive note during a weaker holiday season and instead consumer electronics will be one of the weaker spots this holiday season and continuing along a much weaker trend next year," Hastings said.
Best Buy said it is working with vendors to adjust its inventory levels and its near-term working capital position and expects year-over-year domestic inventory to be flat by the end of the fiscal year, which ends in February.
Best Buy also said it has a new $150 million committed U.S. credit facility, which expires on Dec. 17. The new facility was undertaken in part because one of the participants in its existing $2.5 billion revolving line of credit went bankrupt, which effectively reduced the amount available to the company. It identified the participant as Lehman Brothers.
