Australia’s Woodside Energy had decades of knowledge instilled in its retiring workforce of oil pipeline engineers and wanted to scale that wealth to a much more expansive workforce. When Shelley Kalms, Woodside’s Chief Digital Officer, describes her mission to transform her company into a “true learning organization,” she’s speaking about a “team effort in unlocking the collective intelligence of our organization — both past and present.”
Through using IBM Watson, Woodside created the ability to have expansive knowledge at their fingertips. Today’s incoming employees in the field have access to as much know-how as a person who has worked on the oil rigs for decades.
Today, Woodside has 18 successful Watson-enabled A.I. projects in place, ranging from health to safety -- all of which presents compelling evidence of the potential of A.I. to optimize jobs and increase productivity.
The challenge of bringing shiny new A.I. into a business is demanding changes unlike other technologies that came before it – and that will be only possible by instilling a culture of curiosity world-wide – a core ethos that drives us to self-optimize by embracing new ideas and challenges – asking questions at every turn.
“Infusing A.I. into your enterprise means you’re not just changing technology. I always go back to process, culture and people. All these need to change to have effective A.I.,” says Ritika Gunnar, IBM vice president of data and A.I. Expert Labs and Learning.
“The irony is that the A.I. continuously learns through its experiences, and so do the individuals supporting A.I.,” said Sara Hines, director of provider experience and connectivity at Humana. “This is not the type of technology that you set up and walk away. It needs monitoring, training and supervising to harness the true insights that can be brought forth,” she said.
“Ideally, working with A.I. requires the technical knowledge of a data scientist, the savviness of a teacher, and the ability to translate highly technical information in ways that others can understand”, said Walkiria Schirrmeister Marchetti, who oversaw the development of Bradesco’s virtual assistant, Bradesco Inteligência Artificial—the first in Brazil’s banking industry.
This has served to accelerate adoption of these new digital colleagues within each of the banks. Even more encouraging, bank agents and mortgage experts can expect to take on new roles as A.I. conversation specialists and agile project managers. A.I. can help create opportunities for workers into valuable new career paths.
“Now, the customer support person is not just somebody who answers generic questions but someone who can work on deep, ephemeral complex issues. This means the profile of who your support person is changing to that of somebody more knowledgeable,” noted Gunnar.
At Japan’s Bridge International Corp, A.I. is being used to fuel skills needed for inside sales, an area that has suffered from labor shortages. With A.I., the company can expand opportunities for women who need more flexible work arrangements for child and elderly care, explains Keiko Konno, general manager of Bridge’s service planning and development division.
The company’s A.I.-based call navigation system, Sales A.I. Navigator (SAIN), makes suggestions for what salespeople should say to clients in real time during business-to-business outbound calls. SAIN serves to enhance sales skills for newcomers and less-experienced staff. As a result, the company can open up more employment opportunities for people who are interested in sales careers but lack the experience.
“We chose IBM Watson because of its speech-to-text engine and natural language classifier. Watson speech-to-text engine was the only A.I. that recognized client’s speech at an 80 to 90 percent accuracy rate. Outbound calls require the A.I. engine to be highly flexible, with a high learning capacity,” said Konno.
Since SAIN launched as a sales conversation assistant for salespeople, they report that productivity has gone up by almost 50 percent– encouraging the company to expand sales employment opportunities and training resources, a boost to Bridge’s bottom line and the company’s mission to pursue social good.
The intrinsic linking of A.I. technology within business demands that multidisciplinary teams consisting of IT, business, operations and conversation design come together. Every role needs to bring their subject matter expertise to a new space.
For those with pure technology backgrounds – areas such as data science, DataOps and even DevOps – are helping drive machine learning and A.I.’s ongoing value. That means even database engineers have to mix up their skillset and learn A.I.’s new lexicon. Another emerging area is innovation departments cropping up within the CIO’s organization to help evaluate the business value of A.I., machine learning and data science.
While bridging hard and soft skills may bolster an A.I.-infused workforce in the near future, how do today’s A.I. leaders prepare the next couple of generations for jobs that well… haven’t been invented yet?
Gunnar is well-versed in the answer. She said it’s not enough to teach reading, writing and arithmetic; expand the core curriculum to include coding as early as possible. As she plainly put it: “Python is the new reading.”
