LEAD: In 1962, his first year at the Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company, Thomas B. Wheeler sold policies with a face value of $1.5 million and got a place on the Million Dollar Roundtable, of which he is now a life member.
In 1962, his first year at the Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company, Thomas B. Wheeler sold policies with a face value of $1.5 million and got a place on the Million Dollar Roundtable, of which he is now a life member.
''There aren't too many top executives in this industry who came from marketing, but I think you're going to see more of that now that it's more competitive,'' Mr. Wheeler said. ''You can't do much in this business until you've sold something.''
He was speaking yesterday, just after the company named him chief executive, effective Oct. 1, when William J. Clark, the current chief, will have reached the mandatory retirement age of 65. Mr. Clark will remain chairman, a title he assumed in January 1987, when Mr. Wheeler succeeded him as president. Mr. Wheeler will retain that title.
Mr. Wheeler, 52, came to Massachusetts Mutual from the International Business Machines Corporation, for which he had worked for four years as a salesman. In 1972, after a decade selling life insurance, he was made the general agent for the Boston office.
In 1983, he moved to corporate headquarters, in Springfield, Mass., becoming an executive vice president and head of a newly created division for individual products, which now provides more than half of the company's revenues. Its three other divisions are group life and health, group pensions and an investment management group.
''We're seeing the beginning of a shakeout in the financial services industry, and we think our financial strength will emerge as a major advantage,'' he said. ''We stayed with our major industry, life insurance, and that worked out well, while other companies are unloading their diversifications.''
With consolidated assets of $20 billion, Massachusetts Mutual is the 11th-largest life insurance company. Last year, it had total revenues of $4.3 billion, up 13 percent from the previous year, and paid $475 million in dividends to its policyholders, up 3.5 percent. Its gain from operations, after deducting dividends, totaled $25 million, down 70 percent, a decline that Mr. Wheeler attributed to falling interest rates.
