A spokesman for the Department of Insurance said yesterday that the agency had notified Met Life of its approval on Friday. Officials of both companies said a formal closing was scheduled for Aug. 30. It will be the largest merger ever in the mutual life insurance field, industry officials say.
Met Life, the second-largest American life insurer, brought to the deal about $150 billion in insurance assets. The new company will have more than $166 billion in assets, still trailing the Prudential Insurance Company of America, the nation's largest, officials of the merging firms said.
''We think it's good for policyholders and for both companies,'' said Terry Lennon, the senior vice president for mergers and acquisitions at Met Life. ''The two companies really complement each other very well. They are very strong in the small- business market and we are strong in the large institutional market. They sell to high-net-worth individuals where our strength is in the middle-income market.''
The merger had been threatened by an advocacy group in Boston, the Center for Insurance Research, which contended that a consolidation would diminish the financial value and voting power of New England policyholders. But a Massachusetts state judge refused to issue an injunction and that state's insurance department gave the merger its approval last Wednesday.
''That litigation was against the Massachusetts insurance department,'' he said. ''Our job was to look at whether it made sense for the two corporate entities and whether it made sense for the policyholders.''
Met Life officials said that a handful of the other 48 states in which the two companies do business were required to endorse the plan, but one official said there was ''no reason to expect that they won't.''
Eric N. Berg, an analyst with Oppenheimer & Company, said the merger would lead to significant economies by eliminating overlapping positions. ''It means your unit costs of administering a policy falls,'' he said. ''This means either more profit or you can cut your price and be more competitive.''
Peter Harrington, a vice president of New England Mutual, said Met Life's great financial strength would raise the ratings his company receives from insurance-rating agencies. The ratings for New England Mutual, which will continue to operate as an independent unit, slipped from the highest level in 1992 as its real estate holdings lost value and its investment income fell.
''We deal with a lot of third-party advisers -- lawyers and accountants -- and they are very impressed with ratings,'' Mr. Harrington said. ''Our sales are up 10 percent just in anticipation of the merger.''
