In the latest chapter in the national debate over the structure of mutual insurance companies, the State Assembly's Insurance Committee said yesterday that changes being considered in New York could financially harm millions of policyholders.
The new structure, proposed in legislation last June by Gov. George E. Pataki at the urging of some of the biggest life insurance companies in the state, would enable the insurers to reorganize as mutual holding companies so they could sell stock for expansion without compensating policyholders. Such a change has already been adopted in 18 states and the District of Columbia.
Under current New York law, mutual companies, formed not as business ventures but as collectives of individuals looking for insurance at the lowest possible prices, must distribute the profits they have accumulated over the years -- often billions of dollars -- to their policyholders, the companies' formal owners, before selling shares.
Besides depriving policyholders of a share of a mutual company's accumulated profits, he said the new structure would put policyholders in conflict with new shareholders and raises the possibility for ''substantial management self-enrichment.''
Mr. Grannis said the legislation also raised questions about whether policyholders would continue to have first claim on assets in a bankruptcy and about possible conflicts with Federal securities laws.
He criticized a provision that would require the approval of only a majority of the policyholders who decide to vote on a conversion, rather than a majority of all policyholders. And he said the bill required the companies to give only scanty details of their conversion plans to policyholders before demanding that they reach a decision within 30 days.
As one of several proposals to strengthen the legislation, Mr. Grannis urged that the Superintendent of Insurance be required to make a determination that any conversion be not only ''fair and equitable'' to policyholders, as the bill now provides, but that it also be ''in the best interests'' of policyholders.
Consumer advocates, including Ralph Nader and Jason Adkins, the founder of the Center for Insurance Research, say the new structure would be disastrous for policyholders. One advocacy group, Citizen Action of New York, estimated that the new structure would deprive policyholders of nearly $9 billion.
Neil D. Levin, Mr. Pataki's Insurance Superintendent, and the Life Insurance Council of New York, which represents more than 50 insurance companies, contended yesterday that the proposed legislation would not harm policyholders.
Mr. Levin said the administration was committed to protecting policyholders and had been trying to negotiate any ''gaps or weaknesses'' in the measure with Mr. Grannis. But an aide to Mr. Grannis, Peter Newell, said, ''Before you start negotiating, we felt an obligation to sit down and sift through a lot of complex material and arrive at a position.''
Similar legislation has been defeated in Georgia and Indiana in recent months but is pending in several other states, including Massachusetts, South Carolina and Illinois, and is awaiting the Governor's signature in Wisconsin. No such legislation has been proposed in New Jersey and Connecticut.
Most big mutual companies in the state, including Metropolitan Life and New York Life, say they need the new structure to compete with publicly held companies that can raise money through the capital markets and also use their shares as currency in acquiring other companies.
