Returning to the merger trail after the collapse last month of its $1.89 billion plan to acquire Health Systems International Inc., Wellpoint Health Networks Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the life and health insurance unit of the Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company for about $380 million.
With the deal, Leonard Schaeffer, chairman of Wellpoint, could try to convert a million Massachusetts Mutual customers from traditional fee-for-service health coverage to Wellpoint's main business -- health maintenance organizations and other managed-care networks of doctors and hospitals.
Like some other full-line insurance companies, Massachusetts Mutual has been trying to leave the costly and consolidating health care industry. The company said it would proceed with plans to merge its big money-management and pension-related businesses with the Connecticut Mutual Life Insurance Company.
Wellpoint already has 2.8 million members, mostly in managed-care plans. It said its deal would make it the nation's second-largest publicly traded managed health care company, behind the United Healthcare Corporation, which covers 13.7 million people.
Mr. Schaeffer said the acquisition would set the stage for more combinations and alliances, including some with Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans. Wellpoint, based in Woodland Hills, Calif., was created in 1992 by the nonprofit Blue Cross of California as a way to raise money to expand its managed care business. Wellpoint has been wooing Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans in New Jersey and elsewhere, but no takers have been announced.
Massachusetts Mutual also covers 200,000 employees of California-based companies, and 60,000 in Texas, where Wellpoint is starting a managed-care network. The rest are spread across the country, with concentrations in New York, Georgia, Massachusetts, Illinois, Ohio, Florida and Pennsylvania, a spokesman for the company, Eustis Walcott, said.
Edward B. Keaney, an analyst with Volpe, Welty in San Francisco, said that Wellpoint had been interested in acquiring Massachusetts Mutual's health care lines for some time and that a dispute over their valuation was a factor in the breakup of the Wellpoint-Health Systems deal. He said Health Systems executives thought that most of the health care customers of Massachusetts Mutual were "spread too thinly" to be attractive for managed care.
Wellpoint and Blue Cross of California still face an obligation under California law to establish a charitable medical foundation to repay the state for Blue Cross's years of tax-exempt status. Until the Health Systems deal fell through, they planned to allocate several billion dollars of cash and Wellpoint stock for this purpose. Last week, several consumer advocacy groups asked state regulators to specify stringent requirements for the new Blue Cross foundation.
The sale agreement by Massachusetts Mutual marks the latest move away from health insurance by a traditional insurance company. Last year, United Healthcare acquired Metrahealth, a short-lived joint venture of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company and the Travelers Group, for $1.65 billion, and Healthsource Inc. acquired the health care operations of the Provident Life and Accident Insurance Company.
"A lot of traditional insurers are looking for an exit from this business," said Robert Mains, a health care analyst with the First Albany Corporation. Bucking that tide, the Aetna Life and Casualty Company kept its managed-care business and sold its other insurance lines to Travelers in November.
Traders on Wall Street, distracted yesterday by the East Coast storm, seemed to pay little attention to the Wellpoint deal. The company's shares closed at $32.25, unchanged, in the shortened session of the New York Stock Exchange.
