As pressures mount in Congress and the states for a larger government role in financing and regulating health care, WellPoint, the nation’s largest health insurer, has picked a lawyer and public policy specialist to become its next chief executive.
WellPoint said yesterday that Angela F. Braly, its general counsel and government affairs strategist, would succeed Larry C. Glasscock, 58, who will stay on as chairman when the change takes effect on June 1. Mr. Glasscock said he was retiring from the chief executive’s job for family reasons, declining to elaborate.
It is the largest processor of claims for Medicare, the federal program for the elderly and disabled, a unit that Ms. Braly also ran. WellPoint is also the largest operator of managed care programs for state Medicaid plans for low-income people.
Charles Boorady, a health care securities analyst at Citigroup, said Ms. Braly had not been very “visible” to investors, which he described as “the biggest knock against her.” But he said that at WellPoint. she was well known and respected.
He added, “She is experienced in communicating with the government at a time when several Democrats in Congress are planning hearings involving the managed care companies, and the companies all expect their C.E.O.’s to testify on the Hill.”
Ms. Braly gained operating experience as president and chief executive of Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Missouri, where she worked for six years before she moved to the Indianapolis headquarters of WellPoint after it merged with Anthem in 2004.
He was paid about $8.5 million that year, including a $1.25 million salary and bonuses and stock awards, according to a WellPoint filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission last May. Ms. Braly will be paid a salary of $1.1 million as chief executive.
Alluding to that status, Ms. Braly observed that “70 percent of health care decisions are made by women.” She said that on a personal level, she is getting firsthand experience in navigating the medical system, as she and her siblings help their mother, a widow who lives in Texas, deal with “a complicated health care situation.”
