Last week a spokeswoman for the New York regional office, Krista Conte, confirmed the company would no longer write policies for stand-alone homes in the area for either its own brand of insurance, or its Encompass brand, offered through independent agents.
"Our population is much more dense in the New York area," Ms. Conte pointed out, "and our homes are valued so much more that when you look at the cost of labor, as well as the effects of recent hurricanes like Katrina and Rita, there is certainly reason to evaluate the exposure that we have here."
Allstate now has 26 percent of the homeowner insurance market in southern New York, and those homeowners number about 450,000; Ms. Conte also said the company would continue to write policies for cooperative apartments, condominiums and rental apartments. But insurers' promises could become harder to keep if, as some experts predict, a major hurricane hits the Northeastern United States in the near future.
Ms. Conte said Allstate recently consulted a number of hurricane forecasting models, including one released in early December by researchers at Colorado State University. These predicted greater hurricane frequency in 2006 and saw a stronger likelihood of a Category 3 hurricane on the East Coast.
"None of our companies have told us they're pulling out of the market," said Gabriel Bundschuh, a longtime Scarsdale-based agent, "but after a while some might start to wonder why they're taking a risk that others are not." Last year's hurricane season, the worst on record, set a record for homeowners' insurance claims nationwide, according to the Insurance Information Institute, a Manhattan-based industry group. It says New York now ranks below Florida in terms of the total insured value of residential properties in coastal communities.
Yet it is not as if Westchester homeowners paid low rates. While insurance institute data indicate a 2.5 percent rise nationally in the cost of insuring homes last year, Mr. Bundschuh says Westchester's premiums have risen 8 to 10 percent a year for the last three years. He estimates that insurers have also been expanding the coverage they offer on Westchester homeowners' insurance policies by 6 to 8 percent a year, to cover the high costs of rebuilding in the area.
The last hurricane to hit New York was Gloria, a Category 2 storm, in 1985. Yet many insurers active in the region have long required coastal and Long Island homeowners to carry either a hurricane deductible or a windstorm deductible as part of their policies. Over the last five years, according to Mr. Bundschuh, some insurers have started to add the deductibles to policies they sell to inland residents of Westchester.
The deductibles are usually expressed as a percentage of the insured value of the home; they indicate the amount that homeowners can expect to pay for storm-related damages themselves before their insurance will kick in.
At St. Paul Travelers, the windstorm deductible in Westchester is payable only by homeowners living within 1,000 feet of the shore. Allstate, on the other hand, requires a 3 percent deductible from homeowners living inland and a 5 percent deductible from those living on the Long Island Sound. The only exempted homeowners are those living in very northerly or westerly parts of the county, like Amawalk, Jefferson Valley, Mohegan Lake and certain parts of Yonkers.
Triggers for hurricane and windstorm deductibles vary widely. At State Farm, the deductible kicks in once the National Weather Service has designated a storm a Category 1, which has wind speeds of at least 74 miles an hour. Allstate institutes the deductible only for storms packing 100-m.p.h. winds for at least a minute. According to Bill Goff, a product manager for the New York region, that definition places a storm somewhere between a Category 2 and a Category 3.
Lately, some insurers have tried to generate support nationally for a federally financed insurance catastrophe fund. Some have also expressed concern that as large, solvent insurers pull out of certain homeowners' markets, undercapitalized companies may move in instead.
At the State Department of Insurance, Wayne Cotter, research director, played down such concerns, saying that New York has an elaborate process for screening the financial solvency of any new insurer. Still, the department announced plans last week for a public hearing next month to look at current conditions within the homeowners' insurance market.
"There has just been a lot of talk lately among state legislators, as well as people in the industry because of Allstate's decision," said Michael Barry, the department's director of public affairs. "We decided it was time to convene a public hearing."
A version of this article appears in print on February 5, 2006, on Page WC14 of the National edition with the headline: IN BUSINESS; Allstate's New Policy: None for Homeowners. Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe
