"Now Allstate wants to leave," Ms. Robbins said with a sigh. "What'll be left? Am I going to have to do this all over again in a year? Who will I use? And do I have to move back to New York to avoid all these problems?"
Across New Jersey today, thousands of jittery customers like Ms. Robbins flooded local offices of the state's largest insurer with variations of the questions that she was asking about her policy. Harried local agents declined to talk about their responses with reporters, saying they were under strict company orders to refer reporters' inquiries to Allstate spokesmen. Added a Second Car
And she wanted some assurances about length of coverage. For instance, she said before visiting her agent here, she wanted to know if she would get a refund if her six-month policy was terminated in three months.
Company officials said it would be at least two years, and possibly five, before any of Allstate's 485,000 auto insurance policies could be terminated under the withdrawal plan. The company said on Monday that it wanted to pull out after suffering years of losses on its auto-insurance operation.
"There is no need for panic," the company's assistant general counsel, Richard Levenfeld, said by telephone from Allstate's headquarters in Northbrook, Ill. "This is going to be a slow and responsible process. Customers need take no immediate action." Letter Is Distributed
At Allstate's sales office here, officials distributed a letter they said would be mailed today to all the insurer's policyholders in New Jersey, including the 485,000 with auto insurance policies and an additonal 250,000 with policies on homes, apartments, boats and other property.
"Please rest assured that your current insurance protection is still valid and will be for quite some time to come," the letter adds. "We will give you at least one-year notice prior to the expiration of your policy, followed by an additional notice prior to any non-renewal action."
Mr. Levenfeld, the assistant general counsel, said that under New Jersey's insurance law, the Insurance Commissioner, Samuel F. Fortunato, had 160 days to rule on the withdrawal plan. Mr. Levenfeld said the law entitled Mr. Fortunato to take additional time and the company expected him to do so.
Under the timetable that Allstate has proposed the company would have one year, from the date of state approved the withdrawal plan, to find its policyholders coverage with another insurance company, Mr. Levenfeld said. If Allstate cannot find replacement coverage within that year, then a policyholder would get a notice and would have a second year to find new coverage on his own before his Allstate policy expires, Mr. Levenfeld said.
He said this two-year time frame was Allstate's proposal. Under New Jersey's insurance law, he said, the state could order that five years be spent finding replacement coverage before a policy is terminated.
As for the withdrawal plan's effect on Allstate's 1,400 employees in the state, Mr. Levenfeld said, "Since it will take several years, we'll be employing them for a long time." Ultimately, he said, the company will seek to find some of them jobs in other states. He said others would be dismissed, although Allstate did not know how many yet.
At Allstate's office in nearby Teaneck, Maryellen Annand of Harrington Park, who has Allstate policies on her home and car, said she was shocked by yesterday's announcement. After paying some premiums today, she emerged from the office and said she was not overly concerned about a pullout.
