To cushion against a simultaneous spike in expenses and dip in income, a middle-income family needs about $5,000 in a rainy-day fund but has just $2,000 — a gap of $3,000. Lower-income families need about $2,500 but have just $700.
The findings were part of a report on income volatility that the JPMorgan Chase Institute published this week. The report examined inflows and outflows from six million active checking accounts over a period of about six years that ended in December. The checking account data was anonymous.
Americans’ lack of emergency savings has been a concern for years. The Pew Charitable Trusts found in 2015 that many families lacked funds to cover a $2,000 expense. And the Federal Reserve has repeatedly found that a significant share of households would struggle to cope with an unexpected $400 expense, although it reported in May that the percentage of households able to handle unexpected expenses had “improved markedly” since 2013.
But in the current long period of economic growth and low unemployment, it is especially frustrating that many families continue to lack a cash buffer, according to a report this month from the AARP Public Policy Institute. The AARP found that more than half of American households (53 percent) lacked an emergency savings account, including a majority of people over age 50.
While it’s easier for more affluent people to save, some low-income families do manage to set aside money while higher-income families do not, the AARP found. For instance, a quarter of Americans earning more than $150,000 a year have no emergency savings account, the report found.
Ms. Harvey cautioned that just because people didn’t have a specific emergency savings account didn’t mean they lacked a plan to deal with unexpected expenses — even if it was borrowing from relatives and friends. But it’s clear, she said, that more must be done to promote emergency savings to make families more financially resilient.
Emergency savings are “necessary to meet the obvious issues that arise on a consistent basis for all of us, whether it’s costs for our home, car or health,” said George Barany, director of America Saves, a campaign that is managed by the Consumer Federation of America.
Prudential Financial, for example, last year began offering “sidecar” saving accounts, which allow employees to contribute after-tax money for emergency purposes alongside their pretax savings in 401(k) plans. The program helps workers avoid taking out loans or hardship withdrawals from their retirement plan, which can hurt long-term savings, said Harry Dalessio, head of institutional retirement plan services at Prudential.
SunTrust Banks offers employees a $1,000 contribution if they complete a financial education course and make automatic transfers from each paycheck to an emergency savings account. (The accounts aren’t linked to a retirement plan and can be opened at any bank.) The goal is for each employee to build a $2,000 reserve to draw on as needed, said Brian Nelson Ford, SunTrust’s financial well-being executive.
A majority of the bank’s employees participate as part of its financial wellness program, which SunTrust also offers at cost to more than 200 other employers, including Home Depot, Waffle House, Chick-fil-A and Zappos.
Many savings experts urge people to have a fixed amount from each paycheck automatically transferred to a savings account. That helps build a savings habit without having to remember to shift cash every payday, said Mr. Barany of America Saves.
But that approach may not be the best for everyone. The latest JPMorgan Chase research suggested that it might be more effective for some families to forgo saving when money is tight and instead save aggressively on “spikes” in income, said Fiona Greig, director of consumer research at the institute. Predictable jumps occur in the spring, when families get income tax refunds, and late in the year, when people work extra holiday hours or get year-end bonuses.
“You can give yourself a bit of a break, instead of trying to save during an income dip,” Ms. Greig said. Online banking technology can help customers set flexible goals, she said, like automatically moving more money to savings when their paycheck is bigger.
Most banks make it simple for online customers to set up regular transfers from checking to savings accounts. You could also try one of the many apps — Digit and Acorns among them — that automatically save small amounts of money.
