THE surest sign of spring is the price of asparagus. When it begins to drop, the forsythia show signs of blooming and the tulips planted on the island in the middle of Park Avenue are halfway out of the ground. If you shop carefully this week, you should be able to find asparagus, which are now plentiful, for as little as 99 cents a pound. (You can also find them for twice as much.) The quality could be a little better, but the weather has not been at its best for asparagus.
The asparagus season is short. If you have freezer space, it's worthwhile to buy them in quantity and blanch and freeze them. While frozen asparagus are not as good as fresh, they taste more like them than the canned ones. And what you freeze yourself will cost considerably less than what you can buy canned or frozen next fall.
After a long winter with expensive vegetables, it's a pleasure to find cucumbers from Florida and Mexico at 4 for $1 or even as low as 4 for 89 cents, eggplant for 49 cents a pound and Ribier grapes down 10 cents from last week, at 89 cents a pound.
Lettuce, however, is once again expensive and about to go even higher. According to Michael Pflueger, a spokesman for the United States Department of Agriculture, if you want to buy iceberg lettuce, don't wait until the end of the week. By then it could be up another 50 cents a head. The average cost of a head of iceberg is 73 cents. At least one supermarket, Pathmark, is offering a very desirable alternative - romaine at 49 cents a head. Escarole at three pounds for 99 cents is available at Key Food.
Other good buys in vegetables include green beans, green peppers, cabbage and the large Spanish onions. But once again, there have been heavy rains in Florida and by next week green beans, eggplant and green peppers will probably have jumped in price.
Another sign of spring is the rearrangement of a section of the supermarket to accommodate the Passover ingredients that make their appearance at this time each year. The news is not good. If you must buy matzohs this week, you will find that the average price is up 12 percent from last year. Even Simon Gourdine, Commissioner of New York City Department of Consumer Affairs, is surprised. ''Matzoh prices are once again defying nature,'' he said. The average price is $1.13, up from $1.01 last year. However, if you are willing and able to use a five-pound box of matzohs, some stores are featuring them for $4 to $4.50.
The best meat buys of the week are in the poultry family. Whole fryers can be had for 39 and 49 cents a pound, as long as you are willing to buy house-brand chickens. And if they are labeled Grade A, chances are they are just as good as the chickens with brand names for which you will pay considerably more money.
Turkeys are also a good buy - 59 cents and 69 cents a pound for Grade A, once again house brands. With the exception of a fresh turkey, the best buy is the frozen turkey to which little has been done. It has not been injected with oil and sodium and sodium phosphate; it has not been stuffed; it has not been cut into parts. Selfbasting turkeys contain significant amounts of salt, and despite the name of the best known, most of them do not contain butter.
If you want to produce a moist, tender turkey, baste it frequently as it cooks and disregard most time and temperature charts. Turkeys are usually cooked in far less time than the charts indicate. Check your turkey by cutting into it where the drumstick meets the breast. When the juices run clear instead of pink, the turkey is done.
Several markets are also featuring fresh ducks at 99 cents a pound. They make a wonderful holiday meal for a small family. Some people object to the amount of fat ducks contain. If duck is roasted on a rack and pricked all over with a fork several times during cooking, most of the fat will drain off, producing a crisp skin but still juicy bird.
