The combined company would be based in London and operate under the name Coca-Cola European Partners. It would serve more than 300 million consumers in 13 countries in Western Europe. It is expected to post pro forma revenue of about $12.6 billion in 2015.
“The creation of a larger, unified Coca-Cola bottling partner in Western Europe represents an important step in our global system’s evolution,” Muhtar Kent, the chairman and chief executive of the Coca-Cola Company, said in a news release. “With the strong leadership that will be assembled from across the three organizations, Coca-Cola European Partners will be well positioned to deliver better and more effective service to customers throughout Western Europe and drive profitable growth across multiple beverage categories.”
The newly created independent bottler would have more than 50 bottling plants and about 27,000 employees. Its products would be sold in Andorra, Belgium, Britain, France, Germany, Iceland, Luxembourg, Monaco, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and the Netherlands.
After the transaction, shareholders in Coca-Cola Enterprises would own 48 percent of the combined company, while investors in Coca-Cola Iberian Partners would own 34 percent. The remaining 18 percent would be owned by the Coca-Cola Company.
Sol Daurella, the executive chairwoman of Coca-Cola Iberian Partners, will serve as chairwoman of the combined company, while John Brock, the chairman and chief executive of Coca-Cola Enterprises, will serve as chief executive.
The deal would provide “the scale to better serve the needs of our customers and consumers in Western Europe, to become an even stronger partner to the Coca-Cola Company and create increased value for C.C.E.’s share owners,” Mr. Brock said in a news release.
Deutsche Bank and the law firms Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton and Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom advised the Coca-Cola Company. Lazard and the law firms Cahill Gordon & Reindel and Slaughter and May advised Coca-Cola Enterprises.
