Conservatives have long complained of the dangers posed by the unique status of Fannie Mae. Though it was privatized in 1968, and allowed to sell shares to the public, it was also a “government-sponsored enterprise” (or GSE), which meant it had, for example, a line of credit at the Treasury, and thus was perceived by investors to have at least an implicit government backing. A paper by Peter J. Wallison and Charles W. Calomiris of the American Enterprise Institute explains the creation, evolution and fall of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Wallison was general counsel of the Treasury Department in the Reagan administration, and played a significant role in proposals for the deregulation of the financial services industry. Here are some excerpts:
The peculiar structure of the GSEs–shareholder-owned companies with a public mission–reflected a serious confusion of purpose on the part of the Lyndon Johnson administration and the members of Congress who created this flawed structure in 1968.
In seeking to reduce the budget deficits associated with the Vietnam War and Great Society programs, the administration hit upon the idea of “privatizing” Fannie Mae by allowing the company to sell shares to the public. This, according to the budget theories of the time, would take Fannie’s expenditures off-budget, while allowing it to continue its activities with funds borrowed in the public credit markets.
But turning Fannie into a wholly private company was not acceptable either. Various special provisions were placed in Fannie’s congressional charter that intentionally blurred the line between a public instrumentality and a private corporation. Among these provisions: Fannie was given a line of credit at the Treasury; the president could appoint five members of its board of directors; and its debt could be used, like Treasury debt, to collateralize government deposits in private banks.
Fannie’s congressional charter and its unusual ties to the government ensured that the market would recognize its status as a government instrumentality: that despite its private ownership, the company was performing a government mission. Because it was highly unlikely that the U.S. government would allow one of its instrumentalities to default on its obligations, Fannie was perceived in the capital markets to have at least an implicit government backing and was thus able to borrow funds at rates that were only slightly higher than those paid by the U.S. Treasury on its own debt offerings.
In 1970, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board created Freddie Mac to assist federal savings and loan associations in marketing their mortgages; Freddie was also allowed to sell shares to the public in 1989 and became a competitor of Fannie Mae under a congressional charter that established an identical special relationship with the government.
The special relationship, codified by these unique charters, required the GSEs to pursue another inherently conflicted mission that pitted their shareholders against the taxpayers. To the extent that their government backing allowed the GSEs to take excessive financial risks, it was the taxpayers and not the shareholders who would ultimately bear the costs.
That result–the privatization of profit and the socialization of risk–has now come to pass. U.S. taxpayers are now called upon to fill in the hole that reckless and improvident investment activity–fueled by inexpensive and easily accessible funds–has created in the GSEs’ balance sheets.
The special relationship was also the GSEs’ undoing, because it allowed them to escape the market discipline–the wariness of lenders–that keeps corporate managements from taking unacceptable risks. Normally, when a privately held company is backed by the government (for example, in the case of commercial banks covered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation), regulation is the way that the government protects the taxpayers against the loss of market discipline. When Fannie Mae was privatized in 1968, however, no special regulatory structure was created to limit the taxpayers’ exposure to loss.
The Johnson administration officials who structured the privatization may not have realized that they were creating what we recognize today as a huge moral hazard, but when Fannie became insolvent (the first time) in the high-interest-rate environment of the early 1980s, policymakers recognized that the company represented a potential risk to taxpayers.
I don’t understand why the responsibility isn’t put where it belongs. We are in this mess because Clinton passed a bill and his administration pressured banks into loans that were bad from the start. Barney Franks is the most responsible. His comments, voting record, and videos telling everyone how the republicans were not simpathetic to the low income and minorities of america and it was our duty to get them a house. Bill Clinton and Barney Franks started, promoted, and coerced the legislation and banks to where we are today. All the evidence you want is right there to look at. Barney Franks if the worse of the worse we have in congress and this is a prime example of his fine works. We have Barney Franks to blame for this among others and now we can really be frightened by Pelosi’s antics in the senate. Tell me again why we keep reelecting clowns like these?
Clinton may have started some of this. However, GW had absolute control in the House and Senate for 6 years. What spending bills did he veto. What Bills to control this issue did they put forward? What Fiscal Conservative behaviors did he practice? What exactly did the Conservatives do when they had control? They lined their pockets. They are all corrupt.
To better inform readers of the story behind each story, Times Topics provides access to the contents of NYTimes.com and the most informative sources on the Web on hundreds of subjects. This blog provides a place for informed discussion about the events and circumstances that shape the news and lets readers in on those conversations.
Hyphens can clarify a phrase and are sometimes crucial to the meaning. But if we sprinkle them heedlessly where they’re not called for, the effect is distracting at best and can be confusing.Read more…
