WASHINGTON, Sept. 22 - A federal report accusing Fannie Mae, the giant mortgage company, of improper accounting has led to an informal investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission, the company's board announced Wednesday. Shares of the company fell $4.96, to $70.69, on the New York Stock Exchange.
The Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, which regulates Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, released a report on the Internet Wednesday night saying that an ongoing, eight-month investigation had found improper "cookie jar" accounting -- that is, setting aside artificially large cash reserves to reduce revenues in some years so they can be drawn on in other years when the company needs higher revenue and earnings, thus smoothing out earnings. The S.E.C. says the practice gives investors an inaccurate picture of a company's financial performance.
The housing office said it also found a corporate culture "that emphasized stable earnings at the expense of accurate financial disclosures." The investigation found at least one instance where the company deferred expenses to meet executive bonus targets.
The 211-page report says the findings thus far "are serious and raise doubts concerning the validity of previously reported financial results, the adequacy of regulatory capital, the quality of management supervision, and the overall safety and soundness of the enterprise."
Ann McLaughlin Korologos, the presiding director of the board, released a statement on Wednesday morning, saying, "The board takes the report seriously and is working with Ofheo to resolve these matters." The board has hired former Senator Warren B. Rudman, Republican of New Hampshire, who is now a partner in Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, as an independent counsel. It has also created a committee of independent directors to work with the government regulators.
Specifically, the report criticizes the company for accounting methods used on amortization and derivatives, which it uses to hedge against interest rate and other risks, saying that its methods did not comply with generally accepted accounting practices. As a result, the report found, Fannie Mae's management had misstated interest income over many reporting periods, as well as in its balance sheet accounts.
The report said that the investigation found that a "desire by management to minimize earnings volatility was a central organizing principle in the development of key accounting policies." For example, after unexpected increases in amortization expenses in 1998, Fannie Mae's management developed policies to cushion against future earnings. In an effort to produce the desired results, the staff would do multiple runs of different models.
The report accused the chief financial officer, Tim Howard, of having failed "to provide adequate oversight to key control and reporting functions within Fannie Mae." The report also said that Mr. Howard potentially had conflicts of interest because he played a role in setting the financial targets for the company as vice chairman at the same time he had to meet the targets as chief financial officer.
With $1 trillion in assets and $53.8 billion in revenue, Fannie Mae ranks as the country's 20th-largest industrial corporation and is second among the three largest financial institutions in the country, between Citigroup and the Bank of America.
The investigation was prompted by accounting scandals last year at Freddie Mac, the corporate cousin of Fannie Mae, which resulted in the ousting of several senior executives and a $125 million fine. Freddie Mac had understated earnings by $5 billion to make profits look less volatile. At the time, Fannie Mae's management had asserted that similar problems would not be found at Fannie Mae.
The ongoing investigation is likely to give ammunition to lawmakers who have been pushing for tighter oversight of the two mortgage companies, which are government chartered but publicly traded. Until recently they had been exempt from filing to the S.E.C.
Treasury Secretary John W. Snow and the Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, began urging Congress last October to tighten regulation over the two rapidly growing corporations, which own or back almost half of the mortgages in the United States. Fueled by the housing market boom, Fannie Mae's mortgage portfolio has nearly doubled in the last five years, to $895.4 billion from $481 billion. In April, the Senate Banking Committee passed a proposal along a near party-line vote to strengthen government regulation, but no action has been taken by the full Senate.
"There have been those who, following the Freddie Mac scandal, insisted that it was not a big enough deal to require legislative action to improve the oversight of these housing finance giants," said Congressman Richard H. Baker, Republican of Louisiana, who is chairman of the subcommittee that oversees Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. "In light of today's revelations about Fannie Mae, my response is: Fool us once, shame on you. Fool us twice, shame on us."
