WASHINGTON, Dec. 16 - Fannie Mae, the housing-finance giant, for years has fended off critics who contend that the company is too big, too powerful and too risky. But the Securities and Exchange Commission's Wednesday ruling, that Fannie Mae had seriously breached accounting rules, could touch off a chain reaction that results in stricter government controls, legislation limiting its growth and possibly even a change in top management.
Democratic and Republican lawmakers alike demanded on Thursday that senior executives, including the chief executive, Franklin D. Raines, return tens of millions of dollars in bonuses and other compensation that they had earned based on inaccurate financial statements that the company issued from 2001 until this year.
Fannie Mae's board also met on Thursday to be briefed on the S.E.C.'s order that it restate earnings and declare losses of as much as $9 billion as a result of the accounting violations. On Capitol Hill, lawmakers vowed to swiftly overhaul the oversight of the federally chartered company.
The board members concluded their unscheduled meeting early Thursday evening without deciding whether to keep or remove Mr. Raines after the announcement by the S.E.C.'s top accountant that the company had violated two rules. That decision will now force the company to restate its earnings and take steps to significantly raise its capital level. Three board members, joined by Mr. Raines and other regulators, had attended a briefing at the commission by its chief accountant on Wednesday shortly before he announced his decision, people at the meeting said.
But people involved in the inquiry said that board members know that they cannot let the uncertainty hanging over Mr. Raines linger, for the sake of both the company and the markets, and predicted that a decision would be made soon.
Fannie Mae, which for years has been one of the most formidable political forces in Washington, maintained a low public profile. The company declined to comment further about the findings of the S.E.C. staff or the remarks of lawmakers. Nor did it issue any statement in support of its senior management.
Over the last three years, Mr. Raines has made $14 million in salary and bonus and has taken home $25.6 million in incentive pay. As of the end of last year, he held options on 1.9 million shares of Fannie Mae stock, valued at almost $12 million. Fannie Mae also paid almost $200,000 for Mr. Raines's use of company transportation in 2003.
Timothy Howard, the company's chief financial officer, made $4.3 million in salary and bonus over the last three years and received $7.4 million in incentive pay. At the end of last year, Mr. Howard held options on 607,699 shares with a value of $11.5 million. Fannie Mae's stock has fallen a bit since the end of 2003 when it was $75.06. Thursday the shares closed at $69.30, down $1.39. It is impossible to determine how many of the executives' options are exercisable at current prices.
Securities lawyers said that it was murky whether a little-used provision of the landmark corporate law that Congress adopted after the scandals at Enron and other companies could force Mr. Raines and Mr. Howard to forfeit the bonuses and incentive pay they had received.
The provision, Section 304 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, only appears to apply to Fannie Mae starting in 2003, when it first filed stock registration documents with the commission. The company, which as a Congressionally created organization enjoys benefits that other public companies do not have, including an implicit financial guarantee from the Treasury and an exemption from local taxes, is exempt from federal securities laws. It reached an agreement two years ago with the S.E.C. to voluntarily comply with securities rules beginning in 2003. Section 304, which has proven troublesome to apply because of its vagueness, also requires a finding of "misconduct," which the commission has not made.
Lawyers involved in the Fannie Mae investigation underway at the commission and at the Justice Department said that, now that the commission's chief accountant has ruled, the S.E.C. will focus more sharply on the reasons for the violations and the conduct of top executives.
Mr. Raines and other company officials have acknowledged that they approved of the accounting treatment of derivatives and loan prepayments that were the subject of the chief accountant's report. But they have also challenged the conclusions of another agency, the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, or Ofheo. That agency precipitated the crisis at Fannie Mae when it found three months ago that Fannie Mae violated accounting rules as part of an effort to manipulate earnings and in at least one year, 1998, meet profit targets that would trigger larger bonuses for executives.
"I think the board is well out front and ahead on that issue," said Representative Richard H. Baker, the Louisiana Republican who heads a subcommittee overseeing Fannie Mae. He said that as a result of the findings of the commission and Ofheo, "I think we'll have legislation on the president's desk by summer time."
Mr. Baker also sent a letter to the S.E.C. asking it to examine $200 million in deferred expenses in 1998 and whether, as Ofheo concluded, it was done to meet earnings projections that allowed executives to win their maximum bonuses under an employee incentive program.
"To the extent that any executive compensation was enhanced as a result of inaccurate accounting, which led to the achievement of particular earnings targets, it must be repaid to the corporation," said Representative Barney Frank of Massachusetts, the senior Democrat on the House Financial Services Committee and one of the company's most vocal allies on Capitol Hill. "This didn't happen by accident. This is defective corporate governance."
In the Senate, meanwhile, Senator Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska, said he would reintroduce legislation that was not adopted this year but that would strengthen the government's oversight of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
