THE people over at Pepsico's headquarters were talking about Coke last week. About how Pepsi-Cola had ''licked'' its No. 1 competitor. And how the sweet taste of victory tastes a lot like Pepsi. The quiet types let their bodies do the talking: offering thumbs up signs and winks as they passed each other in the cavernous marble hallways of the company's seven-building 10-acre site here.
Three weeks ago, the Coca-Cola Company announced it had scrapped the top-secret formula for the world's best-selling soft drink - a formula that has been used for 99 years. In its place, Coca-Cola was offering a new, sweeter Coke whose ''smoother, rounder yet bolder'' taste would attract new customers. But a sample of those who tasted the new product said its sweeter, less-fizzy taste was a little more like Pepsi.
''After 87 years of going at it eyeball to eyeball, the other guy just blinked,'' Roger Enrico, president of Pepsi U.S.A. said in the advertisement. ''There is no question the long term market success of Pepsi has forced this move.''
The new Coke hit the market last Monday. The soft drink packaged in sleek silver gray and red cans with an abstract design and a ''new'' emblazoned on the front was on the shelves of supermarkets and stores and vending machines.
The receptionist in the lobby is sipping a Pepsi in between answering calls. Pepsi is free-flowing inside the marble halls and plush, carpeted offices of the company's headquarters. No money is necessary for the vending machines; the sodas are free. But they only offer one product: Pepsi soft drinks.
''No, you don't have to take an oath of loyalty to work here,'' said Norma Imbrogno, a senior secretary at Pepsico. ''There are employees of Pepsico who probably drink other soft drinks.'' She paused and added with a wink and a smile: ''I, for one, drink Diet Pepsi.''
Sam Hall was on the way to San Diego, Calif., when he heard rumors that Coca-Cola was about to announce ''something big'' - something Coke officials described as ''the most significant soft-drink development in the company's history.''
''There was speculation that they were changing the formula, and I said naaah,'' he recalled the other day in his second-floor office overlooking the Pepsico Sculpture Gardens. ''I almost made a side bet that they wouldn't do that.''
For Mr. Hall, who will celebrate his 30th anniversary with Pepsico on Aug. 1, and Alton Wilmer, who has been with the company 25 years -both of whom proudly admit to being ''company men'' - the announcement by Coke was the end of one hard battle in the cola wars.
''As part of training - sales training - we vowed not to buy gasoline from stations that didn't have a Pepsi vendor,'' Mr. Hall remembered. ''We didn't eat in restaurants that didn't serve Pepsi. I'm from that school.''
Mr. Wilmer, manager of public-affairs administration, stood amid Pepsi memorabilia encased in a small lobby on the fourth floor, which serves as a Pepsi museum, and spoke with pride of how far Pepsi-Cola had come from the days when its slogan was: ''The nickel drink that's worth a dime.
The slogan comes from the early advertising campaign for Pepsi in 1938, when it became the first soft drink radio jingle. Pepsi-Cola hits the spot 12 full ounces that's a lot. Twice as much for a nickel too Pepsi-Cola is the drink for you.
Although the corporation's presence in the county has meant additional jobs - there are 1,100 employees - Pepsico has and continues to play an integral role in the county as patron and public benefactor for the arts.
Thousands of county residents, and thousands more outside the county, have visited the Pepsico Sculpture Gardens, a visual archive of sculpture from some of the world's most renowned artists assembled in a critically acclaimed landscape garden.
Granted, it was nice of Pepsico to give a free sign to Mr. Mignone. And yes, many Pepsi workers do stop by the deli to buy lunch or for coffee in the morning. But that doesn't explain why Mr. Mignone's freezer is heavily stocked with cases of Pepsi and Diet Pepsi and only one case of Tab, two cans of Coca-Cola.
''I usually have a few more Cokes,'' he said. ''But the people around here are Pepsi drinkers. Even the high school kids tend to buy more Pepsi than Coke. As for me, I prefer Pepsi to Coke, and I'm not saying that out of neighborly kindness.''
Coca-Cola and Pepsi have been dueling for dominance in the softdrink market for 20 years. But Coke, which has identified itself with everything from soda fountains to John Wayne, has maintained a lead. It has 21.8 percent of the $23 billion wholesale soft-drink market, while Pepsi has 17 percent.
Pepsi, however, through aggressive advertising based on the youth-oriented ''Pepsi generation'' theme, has gained ground and is now ahead of Coke in the take-home market, representing sales from supermarkets and others stores.
Although executives at Coca-Cola said that the decision to change their soft drink had nothing to do with the ''Pepsi Challenge,'' they would have a hard time convincing the top people at Pepsi of that.
The challenge, a taste test in which consumers reportedly chose Pepsi over Coke by a 2-to-1 margin as the drink they preferred, was ''a hard act to follow,'' according to Norma Imbrogno, who works for Alan Pottasch, described as the man who was the brain behind the ''Pepsi challenge'' and who is jokingly referred to by his colleagues as the Father of the Pepsi Generation.
''The Pepsi challenge played an important role in this chain of events,'' she continued. ''When you have people saying they prefer the taste of one drink over another, it's not something you can ignore for a long time.''
Mr. Enrico put it this way in his advertisement: ''Everyone knows when something is right it doesn't need changing. Maybe they finally realized what most of us have known for years...Pepsi tastes better than Coke.''
''At least 50 percent of the soft-drink universe out there is not brand loyal,'' Mr. Ross was explaining after reviewing the tape. ''That 50 percent will go back and forth between Pepsi and Coke depending upon price and availability. The other 25 percent is loyal Coke drinker and 25 percent is loyal to us. We now feel that the 25 percent that was loyal to Coke is up for grabs, and we're going after them. If you believe what you read in the newspapers and what we're hearing, a lot of people are unhappy.''
