Rupert Murdoch’s political influence may be surpassed by his impact on the value of the News Corporation. The stock routinely trades more cheaply than media rivals’, largely because the company, which is listed in the United States, is run at Mr. Murdoch’s whim. As a result of the British phone-hacking scandal, the Murdoch discount has widened to 30 percent.
The affair forced the News Corporation to shutter The News of the World, its most widely read newspaper, and led the company to withdraw a $14 billion plan to buy full ownership of the British pay-TV operator BSkyB. The damage could extend further. Senator Jay Rockefeller, for instance, has called on Congress to open an investigation that would accompany those in Britain.
The News Corporation enterprise now trades at a paltry five times estimates of its earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization for the fiscal year 2012, according to Credit Suisse. That’s 40 percent less than media groups like Walt Disney and Time Warner — double the typical gap seen since 2002.
The most valuable component of the empire is its American cable networks, including Fox News. Put their combined Ebitda, as estimated by Barclays Capital, on a multiple of nine and they’re worth more than $30 billion. The movie studio behind the global blockbuster “Avatar” and the Fox broadcast network, home to hit shows like “American Idol” and “Glee,” together should be worth more than $12 billion.
The publishing arm at the heart of News Corporation’s troubles warrants a lower multiple of four, between those of Trinity Mirror of Britain and The New York Times, for a value just above $5 billion. The Sky Italia satellite unit and various private stakes add more than $6 billion, and holdings in publicly traded companies bring another $10 billion-plus, three-quarters of which is accounted for by News Corporation’s 39 percent stake in BSkyB.
Ignore the money-losing digital unit, total it and strip out net debt of around $4 billion, and News Corporation’s shares ought to be worth about $60 billion. The market values them about a third lower than that. For shareholders, that’s the downside of Mr. Murdoch’s clout writ large.
Silvio Berlusconi’s time is up. It’s no longer about abuse of power and “bunga bunga” sex parties. His continuation as Italy’s prime minister could drive the country into a financial death spiral. His own supporters are shaken and the Italian public is afraid. But the left-wing opposition is behaving responsibly, so there’s some hope.
Italy has pulled back from the brink — slightly. After nudging above 6 percent early on Tuesday, the yield on 10-year government bonds has fallen back to a still uncomfortable 5.6 percent. That’s partly because the opposition agreed to a fast-track parliamentary vote on the government’s new austerity program, so it should pass by the end of the week.
But this is not enough. Mr. Berlusconi is in virtual open warfare with Giulio Tremonti, his finance minister. The idea that this dysfunctional government could serve its term until 2013 is troubling. Italy could lurch from minicrisis to minicrisis with the borrowing cost on its debt, currently totaling 120 percent of gross domestic product, ratcheting ever higher.
As the world’s eighth-largest economy, Italy is too big to bail out. But it is rich and can be rescued by its people. In the past, they have been too complacent about their country’s political and economic mess. The recent scare may help concentrate minds about the need to make some medium-size sacrifices now.
As for Mr. Berlusconi, he is unlikely to fall on his sword. So members of his own right-wing coalition, which has a thin majority, would have to push him out. They might just do that if market jitters continue.
Then, of course, there’s a question of whether any replacement for Mr. Berlusconi would be better. There are broadly two options: a grand coalition led by a technocrat like Mario Monti, the former European commissioner, or early elections. The first might secure some short-term stability. But such a government wouldn’t have a mandate to push through the needed big reforms. For that, new elections would be required.
