J.P. Morgan Chase, which sold billions of dollars in WorldCom bonds to the public just about a year before the telecommunications giant filed for bankruptcy, agreed today to pay $2 billion to settle investors' claims that it did not conduct adequate investigation into the company's financial condition before the securities were sold.
If the court approves this settlement, the total recovered by the plaintiff in the case will exceed $6 billion. That is almost twice the previous record of $3.1 billion paid by Cendant and its accounting firm to settle a securities class action related to an accounting fraud that occurred in 1998.
The settlement came, coincidently, a day after WorldCom's former chief executive, Bernard J. Ebbers, was convicted in federal court of orchestrating an $11 billion accounting fraud that pulled down the company, forcing it to file for bankruptcy protection in July 2002.
J.P. Morgan Chase was the last of the major banks involved with WorldCom to settle with the New York retirement fund. The bank's lawyers had argued that it relied on financial statements vetted by WorldCom's auditor, Arthur Andersen, and that it could not have spotted the accounting fraud. The bank was a co-manager in both the 2000 and 2001 debt offerings; it sold approximately one-third of the securities offered to investors.
The plaintiff in the case, Alan G. Hevesi, comptroller of New York and trustee of the state's common retirement fund, said: "J.P. Morgan Chase is one of the most important financial institutions in the U.S. and in New York. I am particularly pleased that the management of the bank has decided to put this issue from the past behind it so it can focus on growing and creating jobs."
"Given recent developments, we made a decision to settle rather than risk the uncertainty of a trial," William B. Harrison, Jr., chief executive of J.P. Morgan Chase, said in a statement. In connection with the settlement, the bank said it expected to take a charge of $900 million against its earnings in the first quarter of this year.
The bank had a chance to settle the case with Mr. Hevesi last year after Citigroup struck its own deal with the fund and paid $2.575 billion. But J.P. Morgan Chase chose to hang tough, arguing that digging into WorldCom's financial statements was its auditor's responsibility, not that of its bankers.
The turning point in the case came last December, when Judge Denise Cote, who oversees the WorldCom litigation, wrote an opinion noting that the prospectus in the 2001 bond offering was false and misleading and that the banks therefore would have to prove to a jury that they had conducted appropriate due diligence before selling WorldCom securities to the public.
"Underwriters perform a different function from auditors," the judge wrote. "They have special access to information about an issuer at a critical time in the issuer's corporate life, at a time it is seeking to raise capital. The public relies on the underwriter to obtain and verify relevant information and then make sure that essential facts are disclosed."
