NEW YORK — John Thain, the former chief executive of Merrill Lynch, resigned from Bank of America on Thursday after the bank suffered unexpected losses stemming from its acquisition of the giant brokerage company.
Thain tendered his resignation after a 15-minute meeting with Kenneth Lewis, the chief executive of Bank of America, which is based in Charlotte, North Carolina. "Ken Lewis flew to New York today to talk to John" after requesting a meeting, said a Bank of America spokesman, Robert Stickler. "They mutually agreed that his situation was not working and he resigned."
The relationship between the two men soured over the past month as Lewis grew increasingly frustrated that Thain did not have a good grasp of the company's operations, said an individual who is aware of the tensions between the two men but who does not have authorization to speak. Thain had been put in charge of the bank's trading, investment banking and brokerage operations after Bank of America acquired Merrill Lynch in January.
On Friday, Bank of America posted a fourth-quarter loss of $1.79 billion, down from net income of $268 million in the period a year earlier. Much of that was caused by growing consumer loan losses. Merrill Lynch, which posted results separate from Bank of America, had a loss of $15.3 billion in the quarter as a result of fresh write-downs.
Thain is the latest in a series of Merrill executives to leave after the merger. Others who left after the Bank of America takeover include Bob McCann, who was to lead the brokerage unit, and Gregory Fleming, who was in charge of investment banking.
Thain was chosen to lead Merrill Lynch in late 2007. In 2004, he left as chief operating officer of Goldman Sachs to run the New York Stock Exchange and was widely credited with modernizing and expanding the exchange.
Thain's departure from Bank of America comes after the losses at Merrill Lynch prompted the bank to seek $20 billion in additional assistance from the U.S. government in order to close the deal. The second lifeline brought the government's total investment in the bank to $45 billion and made it Bank of America's largest shareholder, with a stake of about 6 percent.
Under the terms of the deal with the government, Bank of America will be responsible for the first $10 billion in losses on a pool of $118 billion in illiquid assets. The Treasury Department and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. will take on the next $10 billion in losses. The Federal Reserve will absorb 90 percent of any additional losses, with Bank of America responsible for the rest.
In exchange, Bank of America will give the government an additional $4 billion stake in preferred stock. It has also agreed to cut its quarterly dividend to a penny, from 32 cents, and accept more stringent restrictions on executive pay.
