Once strong in Asia, the bank was forced to sell off assets in the late 1980s to help its troubled parent, BankAmerica Corp., survive tough times.Then, in dealing its Hong Kong consumer finance firm, SPC Credit Ltd., to American International Group in January, Bank of America appeared to be merely continuing its Asian retreat.
But if James Hulihan has his way, the cash raised in that transaction (perhaps up to $230 million, according to analysts) will help Bank of America further lay the groundwork for a major new push into Asian consumer banking.
At a time when Hong Kong consumer banking appears as cutthroat as ever and other Asian markets face heated competition between increasingly sophisticated local banks and long-established foreigners, Bank of America's plan to re-enter the fray appears braveto some observers.
At the same time, if Bank of America hopes to sell its American-ness to Asian consumers, it will have to first overcome Citibank, which has long concentrated on consumer banking and expanded aggressively in the region.
Mr. Hulihan remains undeterred, touting plans to capitalize on his bank's dominant position on the U.S.West Coast, home to more than half of the country's Asian immigrants and a favored place for business and study by their relatives across the Pacific.
Without much fanfare, and thanks to Bank of America's 1992 takeover of Security Pacific Corp., he already has a profitable business in Hong Kong and a slew of operations throughout the region from which to expand in markets with links through family and business ties to the U.S. West Coast.
Once known as the Bank of Canton and inherited from Security Pacific, the Hong Kong operation's net profit was 787.4 million Hong Kong dollars ($102 million) in 1994, with consolidated total assets of 19.5 billion dollars.
Those Hong Kong profits represented roughly 5 percent of total parent group pretax income and half of the Asian operation's earnings that year.Analysts predict Bank of America (Asia) Ltd.'s earnings may be up to 30 percent higher in 1995.
In Hong Kong, the bank owns a stake in Inchroy Credit Corp.along with its joint-venture partner, Inchcape Pacific PLC, one of the region's largest automobile and equipment distributors. The two partners will extend their cooperation in other markets over time.
Since 1993, the bank has cranked up retail offerings at established branches in Singapore, Taiwan, India and the Philippines, where a consumer finance license has been upgraded into a fast-growing savings bank with 22 branches.
It plans to expand in Indonesia and Thailand and eventually Vietnam, another country many California immigrants once called home.China, too, is on Mr. Hulihan's map: "We will do whatever we can do in China whenever they let us."
But if everyone in the second-largest bank in the United States, with its $232.4 billion in assets at year-end 1995, is as upbeat about Asian consumer banking as Mr. Hulihan, a serious competitor has re-emerged on the scene.
