When Philip J. Purcell, the chief executive of Morgan Stanley, and other top executives of the firm gathered in a conference room at the Four Seasons hotel in Manhattan earlier this year to hear the views of its largest investors, they expected a blunt assessment of the firm's prospects.
What they got was that -- and more. A senior portfolio manager from Fidelity Investments, which collectively owns 5.5 percent of the investment bank, said that Morgan Stanley would command a higher stock price if it focused on its core securities business and that the "universal bank model is a failed experiment," according to several people who attended the meeting.
While certainly a challenge to Mr. Purcell, who has spent his career cobbling together the diverse business units that make up today's Morgan Stanley, the remarks also spoke to a larger trend on Wall Street of large financial institutions focusing on their dominant business and spinning off noncore units.
For Mr. Purcell -- who has faced a chorus of demands from his largest investors that he sell the Discover credit card business -- this trend comes at a sensitive time for him: next week he will preside at Morgan Stanley's annual meeting and defend his stewardship of the firm last year. While Morgan Stanley's earnings grew by 18 percent, its stock price declined by 6.5 percent, compared with a 17 percent increase in the stock price of its peers. The results at Morgan Stanley were weighed down by its slower-growing credit card and brokerage units.
"The clock has been turned on," said Anna M. Dopkin, a portfolio manager at T. Rowe Price, another of Morgan Stanley's larger shareholders. "This doesn't feel like a Disney situation quite yet, but if improvement relative to Morgan Stanley's peers doesn't materialize and something is not done to unlock value down the road, I think you could find an active proxy season in 2006."
So far, there has been no public evidence of any questioning of Mr. Purcell's strategy by his board. That board is a tightly knit group of 10 men -- 5 of them former McKinsey consultants, including Mr. Purcell -- who either sat on the Dean Witter board when Mr. Purcell was the chief executive before that firm merged with Morgan Stanley in 1997, or who have been recently appointed by him. (Laura D'Andrea Tyson is the lone holdover from Morgan Stanley.)
Mr. Purcell said earlier this year that he would consider a sale of the bank's Discover credit card division within two to three years if the unit did not meet growth targets. But in a corporate climate where directors have become more heavily involved in monitoring executive strategy decisions, Mr. Purcell may not have the luxury of such a long wait -- especially if the bank's largest shareholders continue to push for a sale.
No one expects any formal challenge of Mr. Purcell to emerge at next week's meeting to be held at the headquarters of the firm's Discover card operations in Riverwoods, Ill., outside Chicago. Still, Mr. Purcell is likely to face more public questioning regarding his strategy and the firm's performance than at the other meetings he has led since becoming chairman and chief executive of Morgan Stanley in 1997.
Stephen S. Crawford, Mr. Purcell's chief adviser on strategy, makes the point that since Dean Witter went public in 1993, shareholders have argued for a spinoff of Discover; during that time the credit card company's profit grew to nearly $1 billion from $100 million.
"We are not into empire building," said Mr. Crawford, who draws his industry expertise from his years spent as an investment banker specializing in financial institutions. "We just think management has the best intelligence on the business and how to realize its full potential."
As to the firm's broader strategic focus, he ranks, in order of growth potential, retail payments (credit and debit cards), asset management, brokerage and capital markets. Surprisingly, he puts the firm's institutional securities business, which is regarded as perhaps the best in the industry and responsible for 60 percent of its profits, behind the units that are by all accounts not close to being industry leaders.
Earlier this year, a hedge fund investor and former Morgan Stanley employee wrote a letter to the Morgan Stanley board, arguing that Mr. Purcell has mismanaged the company and that the firm should sell or spin off its asset management, brokerage and credit card units. Senior Morgan Stanley executives in the bank's institutional securities division have also expressed their frustration about the firm's slower-growing businesses.
And in the week after the Four Seasons presentation by Louis Salemy, who manages Fidelity's dividend growth fund, both Citigroup and American Express -- two firms that over the years have come to define the ideal of financial conglomeration on Wall Street -- announced that they would shed what they described as noncore businesses.
That same week, St. Paul Travelers, the insurance company, said it would explore a sale of its money management arm, Nuveen Investments, and use the proceeds for its core insurance operations. Over the last 18 months, Citigroup and Merrill have had internal discussions about spinning off or selling their own fund operations, bankers involved in those discussions have said.
All of this increases the pressure on Mr. Purcell and his management team to outline a more definitive strategy for its lagging units, especially Discover card, which while producing a consistent cash flow, remains stuck in its middle-market tier and produces no discernible synergies with the bank's core business of offering blue-chip financial advice.
"I do question the credit card business," said John A. Morgan, the great-grandson of J. Pierpont Morgan and whose father, Henry S. Morgan, was a founder of Morgan Stanley. He is chairman of Morgan, Joseph, an investment bank serving small and midsize companies.
With regard to Discover, Mr. Morgan added: "What good does it do them? It produces cash flow, but the client doesn't care if the Discover card says Morgan Stanley on it. It's an example of unnecessary size. My father would not have been excited about it."
While Mr. Salemy of Fidelity may have been speaking about Morgan Stanley in declaring that large, unfocused financial institutions would no longer command a stock market premium, his comments are perhaps more relevant to the other big successor to the House of Morgan, J.P. Morgan. Despite carrying a prestigious name, today's J.P. Morgan, an awkward collection of commercial banks stitched together over two decades of mergers, bears little resemblance to the small but relentlessly focused institution that in many ways came to embody the concept of relationship banking.
And the proof that big is not better these days is evident in the stock prices of both firm, which have lagged their smaller peers for six years now. Since early 2000, Morgan Stanley's stock has declined by 14 percent, as its lower exposure to fixed-income trading revenues allowed firms like Goldman Sachs and Lehman Brothers to post better returns. Over the same period, J.P. Morgan's stock has fallen 35 percent. Since the announcement of J.P. Morgan's most recent merger, with Bank One in early 2004, which brought in James Dimon as the heir apparent for chief executive, the stock has remained an underperformer, declining 6 percent, compared with a 6.7 percent return for the Standard & Poor's financial index. Both firms also have returns on equity, an important measure of corporate efficiency, that trail industry leaders.
At J.P. Morgan, where Mr. Dimon, as president, has been struggling to generate growth within the investment banking division, it is not yet clear that the latest and largest evolution will result in higher returns for its shareholders. That has caused some to raise the possibility of a reunification of the House of Morgan, giving Mr. Dimon the retail brokerage operation he is said to crave and Mr. Purcell a successor he can present to his board.
Asked about the possibility by a research analyst earlier this year, Mr. Purcell dismissed it. J.P. Morgan executives have said that they would not consider another large merger with an investment bank.
"If they did it, it would be a blood bath," Mr. Morgan said. "It would destroy the entity. And I would question why J.P. Morgan needs a brokerage operation. Dean Witter has never been a class brokerage operation. If you want one, why not go after Merrill Lynch?"
