After my column on Darfur divestment, noting that Berkshire-Hathaway is the largest investor in H-shares in Petrochina, a major and insidious player in Sudan, the company put out a statement. It essentially says that there’s not much that Berkshire-Hathaway can do, that the entity in China is slightly different from the entity that Berkshire-Hathaway invests in, and that dumping the shares would be costly.
I’m glad that Berkshire-Hathaway clarified its position (it hadn’t been willing to give a comment previously). But the Sudan DivestentTask Force put out a statement that addresses these points and notes that at this stage what Berkshire-Hathaway should do is not dump its shares but raise the issue with Petrochina. When aid workers are risking their lives in Darfur, I don’t see why Berkshire-Hathaway managers can’t risk their dignity to raise the issue in a meeting.
I’m a Berkshire stockholder (12 B-shares in my IRA) and this initial response from the company is disappointing. I would hope that they would do one of the actions suggested above: to divest itself from all its Petrochina shares (we can afford it, and anyway some things–even in a stock–are more important than money) or use its influence with Petrochina to see if they can change the latter’s policies. Doing neither of these is unacceptable.
Fidelity Investments also has very large holdings of PetroChina and thousands of shareholders have joined the FidelityOutOfSudan.com campaign to ask Fidelity to divest. Fidelity’s response to these shareholders is that they are “grateful that you took the time to share your concerns”.
I am a shareholder in BH. I have invested there not only because it is a good financial decision, but because I have enormous respect for Warren Buffett’s political philosophy, as well as his generous humanitarian efforts in giving billions of dollars to The Gates Foundation. It is unclear to me how “costly” divestment in PetroChina would in fact be. BH is a massive mutual fund, and I suspect that the PetroChina holding is well less than 1 percent of the funds assets. But even if it would be “costly” to divest, it certainly would be more spiritually “costly” not to. I, for one, will not incur this cost, and will sell my shares unless divestment occurs or PetroChina’s parent company is persuaded to stop supporting Sudan’s soulless regime.
I too am a shareholder of Berkshire Hathaway, and I have written to Warren Buffett and Charles Munger asking that they use shareholder status to raise the issue firmly with the management of PetroChina. I trust this will happen.
Mr. Buffett is very concerned that his net worth might drop from this concern. Even if he gave away 98% of his wealth, he will still have plenty to get by until his final day. His main concern at this time in his life should instead be where he will spend eternity.
My long-standing opinion is that Buffett is one of the worst capitalists imaginable. For a time I thought that he is like Scrooge McDuck, in that he revels in his money but gives little back to society. It now appears that he may, over a long, long haul, give some of his funds to some charity or other, like fellow greedy capitalist Gates. Nobody denies WEB’s skill. But his Aw,shucks manner hides a rapacious accumulator.
Warren Buffet’s has always made his shareholders feel good about their investments not only because he makes us money but because of the ethical way we believe he does it. I hope he takes Nick Kristoff’s suggestion and holds on to his good name, for our sake as well as his.
Even Warren Buffett couldn’t have any influence over Petro China, since Petro China is 88% owned by China itself (through a government entity). Where is Nixon when we need him– At least he had a little influence in China. By the way Berkshire Hathaway has 14/100th of one percent of its investments in Petro China.
I’m not sure how divestment will lead to peace in Darfur. Historically, there hasn’t exactly been a correlation btwn lack of foreign investment and stable political systems. Quite the opposite is the case.
As a BH investor, I too am troubled. However, divestment does nothing more than venting one’s spleen.. BH should increase our investment, so as to make our position more influencial, not less. The we would have the right to exert meaningful pressure on Petrochina.
I have been inspired by your priorities. From reading about the suffering in Darfur, I have increased my in volvement in humanitarian efforts in Nepal, where I have my largest contributions are going and soon I expect to find a program in Ethiopia to support. Thank You Mr. Kristof
While global investment institutions should exert pressure and create awareness of appalling conditions and devastation surrounding the placement of their funding, it is governments and international organizations who have the major responsibility to stop wars and genocide. Why haven’t they taken responsibility and enabled corporations to follow their lead?
While I deeply respect Mr. Kristof’s long standing comment to the Darfur cause, I disagree with his suggestion that BH divest from the company. If BH were divest for political reasons – as opposed to economic ones — someone else would purchase the stock as quickly as it were to enter the market. In such a scenario, the company would not be penalized for its dealings with the Sudanese government but instead would simply have the luxury of not having to deal with a shareholder that does not agree with its business dealings. BH would be much bettter able to influence the company’s operations by holding the stock — but also holding the company responsible for its actions — instead of simply letting the company off the hook. BH should take advantage of its position to force accountability on the part of the Chinese company.
This story supports the point I’ve made several times on this blog the Darfur War is a mineral and/or oil asset play. The rebels are prolonging the war to get their cut of the spoils. Biafra all over again.
We are hardly in position to play high and mighty with Khartoum. We would have gone to war with Britain to seize Canada had London intervened in the Civil War by sending “peacekeepers” as an excuse to protect its Confederate cotton suppliers.
I am a Berkshire Hathaway shareholder and am in complete agreement with Mr. Buffett’s explanation on why divestment of Petrochina shares doesn’t make any sense —- from Berkshire’s and society’s point of view. I suggest readers of this column spend a few minutes to go over Mr. Buffett’s statement on //www.berkshirehathaway.com site.
As the National Policy Director for the Sudan Divestment Task Force, I’d like to clarify a few comments made above. First, Berkshire Hathaway owns just over $3 billion in PetroChina shares, which is somewhat over 1% of the company’s total market capitalization- most of those shares, however, are “H” shares which trade directly on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange (rather than American Depository Receipts which trade on American stock exchanges). I’d also like to clarify that there are many actions short of divesting that Berkshire Hathaway could take to influence PetroChina/CNPC’s behavior. This debate should not be framed as an “all or nothing” debate- instead, there are escalating steps (done in a timeframe commensurate with the urgency of genocide) that can be taken by major shareholders of PetroChina that may have, as their end-point, divestment. I encourage readers to review the Sudan Divestment Task Force’s statement in response to Berkshire Hathaway available at //www.sudandivestment.org/docs/berkshire_response.pdf
I wish someone with power makes a direct and clear statement against investing in companies like PetroChina soon. I am putting my eggs in Obama’s basket. I pray Obama is elected because Obama cares. Vote Obama. Mr. Kristof, I think you should run for president too.
Again, THank you Mr. Kristof, I wish more people read your column. I also wish NYTimes would put you on the front page. I vote for you. Also, WRITE ABOUT THE DOCUMENTARY SAND AND SORROW. and tell the producers to FINISH IT ALREADY.
Mr. Buffett has been famous for his complete hands off policy in managing Berkshire’s subsidiaries, not to mention its stock investees for which Mr. Buffett has had reputation as a passive investor throughout his career. In this context, it seems silly to ask Mr. Buffett to go to the management of Petrochina to demand a change in Chinese foreign policy in Sudan, although CPCC, Petrochina’s major sharholder,has operation in Sudan, not Petrochina itself. I think you guys are asking too much from Mr. Buffett, whose primary responsibility as CEO of Berkshire is not in foreign policy but in economic well being of Berkshire.
This blog expands on Nicholas Kristof’s twice-weekly columns, sharing thoughts that shape the writing but don’t always make it into the 800-word text. It’s also the place where readers make their voices heard.
