5:50 p.m. | Updated Senator Ben Nelson, the Nebraska Democrat who switched sides this week to help block consideration of an overhaul of financial regulations, reported last year that he and his wife, Diane, owned up to $6 million in stock in the investment company run by the famed Nebraska investor Warren E. Buffett, who could be hurt by passage of the measure, records show.
Since Mr. Nelson’s surprise vote on Monday, speculation on Capitol Hill about his motivations have centered on his relationship with Mr. Buffett, whose firm, Berkshire Hathaway, has lobbied against one section of the legislation.
After the vote, Mr. Nelson did not address the possible connection with Mr. Buffett and pointed instead to broad concerns about uncertainties surrounding the legislation and the possible negative impact on industries like auto dealers.
But a number of political figures, including Christopher J. Dodd, the Connecticut Democrat who authored the legislation, have pointed to Mr. Nelson’s relationship with Mr. Buffett as another possible explanation. The Wall Street Journal reported this week that Mr. Nelson had successfully pushed in the Senate agriculture committee at the request of Berkshire Hathaway for an exemption that would allow firms with existing derivatives contracts to avoid posting large amounts of collateral.
In his most recent financial disclosure statement filed last year, Mr. Nelson reported owning between $1.5 million and $6 million in Berkshire Hathaway in 2008, his largest investment in any single company. A spokesman for Mr. Nelson could not be reached Tuesday afternoon.
Mr. Nelson’s financial connections to Berkshire Hathaway, which were mentioned in the Wall Street Journal on Tuesday, appear likely to only intensify speculation about his vote in blocking the financial regulations bill.
The aide acknowledged that Mr. Nelson had spoken earlier this month with executives from Berkshire Hathaway because “they were concerned about the derivatives bill being applied retroactively rather than prospectively to existing contracts’’ and that he shared those concerns and passed them on to the agriculture committee, which decided to include the exemption for existing contracts.
But he said that issue and Mr. Nelson’s stock holdings in the company had nothing to do with his vote to block consideration of the legislation, including the derivatives measure. “He voted no because he was concerned that he’d heard from Nebraska businesses about the underlying financial bill have an effect on them,’’ Mr. Thompson said.
Melanie Sloan, executive director of Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, a private watchdog group, said that “under the overly permissive Senate rules, Sen. Nelson does not have a conflict of interest that would prevent him from voting in a manner that benefits Berkshire Hathaway. Just because the Senate Ethics Committee won’t see a conflict, however, doesn’t mean the rest of America won’t.’’
This is the second time in recent months that Mr. Nelson’s position on a major piece of legislation has proven controversial. In the so-called “Cornhusker Kickback,” he supported the Obama administration’s health care proposal after working out a deal to ensure that the federal government pay the costs of a proposed Medicaid expansion in Nebraska, but he scuttled the deal in January after it provoked a backlash for the administration.
President Obama drew criticism on Thursday when he said, “we don’t have a strategy yet,” for military action against ISIS in Syria. Lawmakers will weigh in on Mr. Obama’s comments on the Sunday shows.Read more…
