Investors unimpressed by Hewlett-Packard’s dysfunctional governance have sold off shares, leaving the tech company vulnerable to a bid. And Larry Ellison’s acquisitive Oracle is a credible potential suitor. A Breakingviews analysis suggests that even while paying a big premium, Oracle could reap a hefty return.
Despite H.P.’s expensive deal to buy Autonomy, a British rival, H.P.’s stock is cheap. It trades at less than five times estimated earnings for the company’s next fiscal year. If Oracle paid a 40 percent premium to gain control, the total outlay, including assumed debt, would be a bit over $80 billion. That’s more than half of Oracle’s enterprise value. But Oracle has $32 billion of cash and short-term investments. For a compelling deal, the company could always issue stock as well.
And the numbers are persuasive. Analysts reckon H.P. will pull in $13 billion of operating profit in the 2012 fiscal year. Add in a fraction more from Autonomy, and that would bring Oracle a 16 percent annual return on its total investment off the bat. Oracle might be able to squeeze out some costs. If it cut 10 percent of H.P.’s selling, general and administrative expenses and its research and development costs, that would bring $1.6 billion in annual savings. Throw those in, and pro forma for the 2012 fiscal year Oracle’s return on investment would be 18 percent.
Along the way, it is possible that H.P. could slightly ease the burden for an acquirer by selling businesses it bought last year in its $1.2 billion purchase of Palm. The mobile operating system may be in limbo, but the related patents are a hot commodity.
There are potential snags, however. The presence at Oracle of Mark Hurd, chief executive of H.P. until just over a year ago, may delay any possible move. Moreover, Mr. Hurd might not be the ideal boss for an Oracle-owned H.P. As chief executive, he cut costs too deeply. There’s also the important broader strategic question of whether Oracle should increase its commitment to hardware. Purely on the figures, though, H.P. would make a lucrative target.
Morgan Stanley’s October woes feel like a drama lacking a crisis. The company, which three years ago suffered a bank run, was already facing skepticism about its turnaround before the third quarter turned crummy. But that’s not behind its latest misery. Morgan Stanley’s stock has dropped more than 17 percent since Thursday after the cost of insuring its debt against default rose as investors again became anxious over the bank’s exposure to Europe. But the substance to the worries looks thin.
A Zero Hedge blog post two weeks ago snowballed. It asserted that Morgan Stanley had $39 billion of French bank risk on its balance sheet, or more than half its assets minus liabilities, known as book value. But these numbers dated to 2010. The bank, led by James Gorman, has almost halved that figure. What’s more, the blog picked only the gross exposure, which included client assets, and those of the bank, held at French institutions. It ignored cash, hedges and collateral. Factor those in and the net exposure is zilch.
Of course, 2008 taught investors not to take banks at their word about exposures — or the quality of their hedges. Morgan Stanley itself had almost a $10 billion loss in 2007 from disastrously hedging an otherwise-smart mortgage bet.
So investors are skittish. But even after the bank’s recent rout, Morgan Stanley shares are hardly out of whack with rivals’. Like Citigroup, it trades at just about two-fifths of book value, but that is far better than Bank of America’s 27 percent. Even JPMorgan Chase and Goldman Sachs, which navigated the last crisis deftly, are trading at only two-thirds of book value. Under pressure to show that its turnaround in fixed-income trading and wealth management is working, Morgan Stanley ought to trade at a discount anyway.
That doesn’t mean Mr. Gorman should hold his breath and wish for the latest ruckus to pass. Providing more information on the way the company hedges its exposures, and with whom, would help — and he is likely to do that later this month. Of course, as the autumn of 2008 taught investors, once a panic over financing and capital hits a bank, all bets are off. Mr. Gorman may need to get out even further in front of this one.
