Hewlett-Packard, the nation's third-largest computer company, shocked Wall Street's already jittery technology investors yesterday morning with the news that its earnings had fallen well short of projections despite stronger-than-expected sales.
Hewlett-Packard also announced that its negotiations to acquire the consulting arm of PricewaterhouseCoopers had been called off, a not entirely unexpected development that many on Wall Street treated as good news. Most analysts had been arguing that the Pricewaterhouse asking price was too steep -- a deal worth as much as $18 billion had been discussed in September -- and many feared that Hewlett-Packard would find that absorbing 31,000 consultants was too distracting.
The announcements were made before trading began yesterday. Investors, who had been expecting earnings to be released at the end of the day, reacted by sending Hewlett-Packard's stock plunging nearly 17 percent in heavy early trading. As the surprise wore off, sentiment improved and the shares ended the day at $34.81, down $4.44.
Hewlett-Packard said that it earned $922 million, or 45 cents a diluted share, in the quarter that ended Oct. 31 , a 21 percent increase from the $760 million, or 36 cents, reported a year ago. Revenue jumped 17 percent, to $13.3 billion from $11.4 billion a year ago.
But the headline for Wall Street was that excluding gains on investments and other one-time financial events, Hewlett-Packard's earnings amounted to 41 cents a share, a full 10 cents a share less than Wall Street's expectations, based on analysts' projections tracked by First Call/ Thomson Financial.
Investors had been looking for news that would reverse the slide that began in July when Hewlett-Packard's stock topped $68, but this only added to their concerns. Instead, they heard Carly Fiorina, the Hewlett-Packard chairwoman and chief executive, apologizing not just for the earnings shortfall but for the company's inability to see it coming.
Unlike last week, when Dell sent technology shares plunging by meeting expectations but forecasting slower-than-projected growth for next year, Hewlett-Packard's news was harder for investors to parse.
''There is no one overriding cause,'' Ms. Fiorina said during a conference call with analysts. She went on to give a litany of reasons for the earnings shortfall, some of which might be classified as good news in disguise.
The clear-cut rotten apples in the mix included an increase in bad debts in the finance arm and losses in the company's venture capital portfolio stemming from the woes of dot-com start-ups in which Hewlett-Packard had a stake. Ms. Fiorina said that the latter problem was being addressed by a management shake-up, a more formal process to review investments and lowered ceilings on how much the company will invest in individual start-ups.
Hewlett-Packard's Verifone subsidiary, which sells electronic payment services, performed worse than expected, costing $48 million in losses and restructuring costs in the quarter. Hewlett-Packard has been unsuccessfully looking for a way to sell the unit.
And, like many other multinational technology giants, Hewlett-Packard also suffered from the unexpected trends in exchange rates during the quarter. Profits from sales in Europe were reduced and the costs of laser printer components in Japan were higher than projected.
But a substantial part of the shortfall came from developments that might be seen more as accounting surprises than bad news. Selling expenses were unexpectedly high because the sales force responded more enthusiastically than anticipated to incentive packages. The fired-up sales force pushed revenue for October higher than Hewlett-Packard had expected and created a strong order backlog for the current quarter, which is the first of fiscal 2001 for the company.
Another unexpected growth in costs resulted from faster-than-expected hiring of new sales employees, consultants and researchers. Ms. Fiorina said that the hiring would pay off in the future. However, the company is now requiring senior executives to oversee it more closely to prevent future spending surprises, Ms. Fiorina said.
Taken together, the various problems highlighted weaknesses at the company in tracking its businesses rather than serious earnings concerns, Ms. Fiorina said. The monitoring shortcomings should be addressed by new information systems the company brought online Nov. 1 and unexpected selling expenses should be better controlled by new tools managers have been given to track pricing and profits in their groups, she said.
Ms. Fiorina and analysts agreed that the company was unlikely to win back investors until it had shown that it could meet both revenue and earnings growth projections. ''People are worried they had to get too aggressive on price to drive the revenue growth,'' said Antonio Sacconaghi, who follows the company for Sanford C. Bernstein.
Ms. Fiorina denied that integrating so many consultants would have been a problem. She called the consulting company a ''high-quality operation'' and said that the strategic logic for such a deal was ''compelling.'' But she acknowledged that the two sides had been unable to agree on how to make sure the consultants stayed with Hewlett-Packard. Perhaps the biggest roadblock though was what James J. Schiro, chief executive of Pricewaterhouse, diplomatically called ''market conditions.''
In plain English, the sharp decline in Hewlett-Packard's stock since the talks began made it impossible for the two sides to agree on a cash-and-stock package large enough to satisfy the consultants without killing the stock.
