The deal for Safeco, based in Seattle, will help expand the Boston-based insurer’s operations to the West Coast. Liberty Mutual’s offer, consisting of $68.25 a share in cash, represents a 51 percent premium to Safeco’s closing stock price on Tuesday. It is not subject to financing contingencies.
Safeco’s business has been battered recently from increased competition in auto insurance and higher payouts for losses in the California wildfires. The company reported $144.5 million in fourth-quarter profit in January, down nearly a third from the same time a year ago. Its operating earnings, which analysts use to measure its performance, were $140.1 million for the period.
After the deal’s closing, scheduled for the end of the third quarter, Safeco will be folded into Liberty Mutual’s agency markets unit, which saw revenues of $5.6 billion last year. The combined operations would have about 15,000 independent agencies nationwide.
“This is the opportunity to take West Coast inventiveness and launch it with a global brand at a substantial premium to Safeco shareholders,” Paula Reynolds, Safeco’s chief executive, said in a statement.
Expect more insurance deals to unfold as stock prices are down along with profits. Competition is strong and there is downward pressure on insurance rates just as inflation is causing costs to rise and lower interest rates are hurting investment returns. While catastrophe losses have been relatively tame in the past 2 years, there are certain to be some major events going forward with timing the only issue.
MM why would that be a burden only NJ carries? While LM writes in jersey it in no way is the big dog on the block. Rates may in fact go up across the board but it has nothing to do with M&A, stocks are in the dumper that is where Insurance companies make their money not premiums.
Yeah, those of us escaping Safeco within these past several years saw this coming when Mike McGavick took the reigns as chief and claimed to be turning around the company. While there he professed the utmost dedication to Safeco constantly (and irately at times) defending his dedication and not as a prepatory step to run for political office. Of course, when it was safe to do so, he jumped ship, with a HUGE golden parachute and many laid-off employees in his wake. Then ran for office. The last step was selling off the U-District building so as to not be tied to that highly visible piece of property. When Safeco moved downtown, we knew for sure a sale of the company was in the works. McGavick’s republican wet dream come true: Increase CEO wages and bonuses, reduce jobs and salaries for workers, and sell the company. Republicans are hard at work this days making the rich, richer and the poor, poorer. Safeco is just another sad example.
David, And where do you think Liberty Mutual got the cash to buy Safeco? Getting rid of high-priced senior employees with parachutes, layoffs, retirements, and replacing them with inexperienced newbies with computers and protocols…If they’re even in the US. People don’t shop insurance for quality, because so few people ever have a major claim or, if they do, more than one. People shop for insurance by price, cost-cutting in king, and Liberty’s earned its crown. But is it good for the industry? Good for America? Time will tell. SK
As a dedicated long time employee of Safeco, I am sad to see such an icon be dismantled. I’ve seen many friends and co-workers laid off with a decent severance package, in the past few years. Now, because I am good at my job and dedicated, I get to loose it, with no hope of a severance package, while my CEO walks away with millions. Why am I being penalized for ‘being responsible’?
David—you are wrong on your facts. McGavick had nothing to do with the sale of the building. That was all Paula. Get your facts straight. And get over your republican hate. One had nothing to do with the other.
I have worked at Liberty Mutual for over a year now, and being on the inside of these acquisitions, they are a great thing for the insurance industry. Agency Markets which is what safeco will be folded into has a strong presence in commercial business while Safeco has a strong hold on personal lines business. This will surely help Liberty have a strong presence on the West Coast. The market is so soft right now, i dont think that anyone should be worried about losing there low “safeco” rates, as rates are expected to continue to drop in the near future. Both sides should be extremely happy with the acquisition.
As another long time Safeco employee I would have to agree with TW. Safeco is retaining ALL rights to it’s name. So their name will remain, Safeco Field will remain, Safeco brand, product, and prices will remain. Safeco policyholders will not be receiving “welcome to LIberty Mutual” packets. Safeco will just become a large part of Liberty Mutual’s Agency Markets and make their Personal Lines insurance a much stronger presence then what it currently is. At the same time LIberty Mutual will enhance and definitely strengthen Safeco’s commercial lines which are weak in comparison. Stockholders and consumers will do nothing but benefit from this deal. As for Safeco employees, that’s a differen tmatter and we’ll just have to wait and see…
I just cannot understand why people worry about if SAFECO Field will retain its name or not.. How about some sympathy to SAFECO employees? I am more concerned about the employees and their families than the ballpark.
As a former Safeco employee, this doesn’t surprise me a bit. I left the company awhile back over workload and overtime issues. Management wanted me to work OT and not turn it in. When I made an issue out of it, they basically said hit the road if you don’t like it. Unlike many of my former coworkers who just sucked it up, I quit. I hope Liberty starts by firing every low level manager on up in that company. I had a large portion of my retirement plan tied up in their company stock. I just transferred everything into another fund and made a very nice profit. Glad to see they’re being sold…
As a former employee of Safeco, I am glad to see this happen. This was the worst management I have ever seen. It was only a matter a time before this happened. I worked in California where you had to have a degree to work there at the time. Then Safeco hires four managers who didn’t have degrees, and they were racist as hell. They were extremely discriminatory in how they ruled in claims. We use to call Safeco Aliso Viejo, bad faith central. It makes sense that Liberty Mutual is taking over, because they, along with Farmers Insurance are the industry’s worst bad faith insurance companies. I agree with Hammer Time, they over loaded you with work and set unrealistic achievement goals to avoid giving anyone a raise. However, they had their favorites, those were the ones who were dumb as dirt and didn’t know anything. I also hope they fire management and human resources because they were racist, ignorant, incompetent assholes.
I’m shocked that many folks wrote about LM’s high rates. In Washington State, LM’s rates are far less compared to most other companies including Safeco (of course, if you have claims and tickets, teen drivers, etc, that’s another story). I’ve been a LM employee for over 2 years now and the more I learn about the company, the more I give my trust to it. In this economic downward spiral, LM is one of the few companies that have not had massive losses. LM is still on the plus side. That’s because LM does so many researches to make sure our customers are not hit hard when our economy folds.
If your rate is higher than some other companies in your area (and you really, honestly don’t have any claims, tickets, whatever else that can effect the rate), then it might be that they are getting ready, getting a cushion ready incase of something bad happens.
As for those that had a bad experience working for Safeco, I am enjoying LM more and more each day! I can’t wait to make this a long term career and retire from LM! I enjoy it so much that I encourage my friends and family to apply for jobs. There’ll always be an ass in the company but the most important part is the foundation of the company and how they are treating my clients and me.
