There are few dramas in the corporate world as messy -- and riveting -- as a battle between the founding family of a company and its present management. Hewlett-Packard, the patriarch of Silicon Valley, is now enduring such a struggle. It reveals a good deal about not only the state of a troubled company, but also the state of the industry Hewlett-Packard did so much to create.
When Carleton Fiorina, one of the nation's most prominent female corporate executives, was brought in from Lucent to reinvigorate Hewlett-Packard in 1999, it did not take her long to figure out that one of the company's most important assets was its legendary history. Hewlett-Packard ads were soon featuring the garage where two Stanford engineering students, David Packard and William Hewlett, started the company in 1938, and with it Silicon Valley, with $538 in start-up capital.
Now, as she strives to reinvent the company by acquiring Compaq for some $20 billion, Ms. Fiorina finds herself in a public donnybrook with Walter Hewlett and David Woodley Packard, the founders' sons. Unhappily for Ms. Fiorina, they oppose the merger, which shareholders must vote on early next year. Together with Hewlett family foundations that have also opposed the deal, they control about 7 percent of Hewlett-Packard stock.
Walter Hewlett, a company director, echoes the concerns of those on Wall Street who point to the disastrous track record of major mergers involving technology firms. Ms. Fiorina, who tried unsuccessfully to acquire the consulting business of PricewaterhouseCoopers last year, believes a marriage with Compaq can give Hewlett-Packard the heft to become a full-service computer company, similar to I.B.M. Skeptics counter, rather convincingly, that the deal only leads Hewlett-Packard deeper into the low-margin PC business and that Compaq would not fill some of the important gaps in the array of Hewlett-Packard products. Trouble is, the alternative of focusing more narrowly on its profitable printer and imaging businesses seems like a rather prosaic fate for the storied Hewlett-Packard brand.
David Woodley Packard, a former classics professor, feels Ms. Fiorina is undermining Hewlett-Packard's corporate culture. He is especially upset that the company and Compaq are trumpeting $2.5 billion in cost savings (partly achieved through 15,000 layoffs) as a rationale for the deal. ''Bill and Dave never developed a premeditated business strategy that treated H.P. employees as expendable,'' he said, recalling the more paternal attitude of the founders.
The David and Lucile Packard Foundation, one of the nation's largest philanthropic organizations, will be a key arbiter in the dispute. The foundation, led by Susan Packard Orr, a daughter of the founder, is the single largest Hewlett-Packard shareholder, controlling 10 percent of the stock. It has not yet decided whether to support the merger, but has said it will make its own independent assessment. With most of its endowment tied up in Hewlett-Packard stock, the foundation's net worth has declined in value from $13 billion a year ago to close to $6 billion. The foundation's vote may prove decisive in undercutting the two sons or solidifying shareholder opposition to Ms. Fiorina.
A founder's descendants can be important guardians of a corporation's values, but tension between them and professional managers is virtually inevitable in times of trouble. The Ford family recently ousted Jacques Nasser as chief executive and installed William Clay Ford Jr. in his place. Depending on what the Packard foundation decides, the looming proxy battle could turn out to be a rare shareholder rebellion that succeeds, or yet another episode in the history of complex enterprises that outgrow their founding families.
