NEW YORK — United Airlines and Continental Airlines have been holding talks on a potential merger, a combination that would create the biggest U.S. domestic airline, with a combined value of $9 billion, according to people involved in the talks.
The discussions, though far from complete, could spur a wholesale realignment of the troubled airline industry. The talks, apparently initiated by United, recently picked up pace after US Airways' bid last month to buy Delta Air Lines for about $8 billion, these people said.
Large airlines like United, the No. 2 domestic carrier, and Continental, the No. 5, have spent recent years lowering their costs to become more competitive with low-cost carriers and with each other. None of them wants to be at a significant cost disadvantage to competitors.
Meanwhile, AirTran Holdings, a low- cost carrier that competes against Delta, was expected Wednesday to make an offer for Midwest Air, a smaller airline based in Milwaukee, for about $200 million in cash and AirTran stock, a person close to the deal said Tuesday night.
But two executives with knowledge of United's efforts expressed skepticism over the likelihood of a United-Continental deal. The executives, who requested anonymity because of their role, said Tilton had initially approached Delta, which said it was not interested, before contacting Continental.
Any deal between the two airlines is far from imminent. A person with knowledge of the talks between United and Continental said the carriers wanted to see how antitrust regulators reacted to a possible US Airways offer to take over Delta. Delta's management opposes the proposal and intends to file its plan to exit bankruptcy next week.
Analysts have long favored a combination of United's Asian routes and heavy coverage of the western United States with Continental's Latin American and European routes and its large and highly profitable hub in New Jersey.
Any effort by the two to merge would be complicated by an agreement Continental has with Northwest Airlines. That agreement could allow Northwest to block certain merger transactions involving Continental, but it could allow Continental more freedom to enter into a combination if it were the acquiring party and approval of its shareholders were not required. Also, if Northwest entered into a merger, it would lose its blocking power over Continental.
The U.S. airline industry is expected to be modestly profitable for 2006 and more solidly in the black for 2007, after more than $30 billion of losses in recent years. However, the industry remains highly leveraged.
US Airways' merger with America West last year, reducing the combined carrier's costs and eliminating unprofitable routes, spurred interest in other combinations. Delta's unsecured debt, which would convert into new common stock upon its exit from bankruptcy, surged in market value after the US Airways offer last month, and US Airways' stock also rose on investor enthusiasm for the combination.
Still, mergers are difficult in the airline business. Seniority-based labor agreements make merging groups of pilots, mechanics and flight attendants contentious; the US Airways and America West labor groups have yet to complete their integration. And antitrust concerns have dampened interest in past combinations.
