A flurry of so-called megamergers — those valued at $10 billion or more — during the first half pushed the value of announced acquisitions in the United States above $1 trillion for the first time, according to data from Refinitiv. Worldwide, the value of deals stood at about $2 trillion.
In June alone, acquisitions worth more than $400 billion were announced, the most in a single month this year. That included large purchases like AbbVie’s $63 billion deal for Allergan, an $86 billion merger of United Technologies and Raytheon, and Salesforce.com’s $16 billion acquisition of Tableau Software.
But below these big figures is some evidence of caution. The value of so-called cross-border deals was down 46 percent from a year ago, when it reached about $900 billion. Chinese companies, which went on an overseas binge three years ago, announced just $19 billion in acquisitions, down about 74 percent from a year ago.
European mergers dropped 56 percent. Underscoring the extent of that decrease, European deals accounted for just 15 percent of the total worldwide. That’s the lowest share in two decades. And the slowdown may well persist as Britain’s effort to exit the European Union drags on.
“If you’re looking to do a deal in Europe you’re going to wait until you get a little more certainty around where Brexit is going,” said Anu Aiyengar, the head of North American mergers and acquisitions at JPMorgan Chase.
It wasn’t all because of worry about the economy. Regulatory concerns — long a frustration for deal makers — and political pushback scuttled big transactions in Europe, notably talks of a tie-up between Fiat Chrysler and Renault as well as Deutsche Bank and Commerzbank. And the decision of European antitrust authorities this year to block a plan by Alstom of France and Siemens of Germany to combine their train-making units helped chill merger activity in the region, bankers and lawyers said.
Activity was driven by big deals: The United States accounted for 21 of the 25 deals valued at more than $10 billion worldwide, and the value of those deals made up 63 percent of the overall value of American mergers.
That’s notable because paying in cash requires greater confidence in a target company’s financial prospects and, therefore, the economy’s trajectory. (There is recent evidence, however, that there has been a pickup is such deals.)
Transactions done with all stock have jumped nearly 80 percent, while all-cash transactions have dropped about 20 percent. And for the first time in two decades, the value of all-stock deals exceeded those using all cash, Refinitiv’s data showed.
“So much of M&A is psychology driven. If you feel you have tailwinds, not headwinds, you will be willing to take just a bit more risk,” said William J. Curtin, the global head of mergers and acquisitions at the law firm Hogan Lovells.
