“Why do you want to go to that oil field? And why now?” So went the conversation with Christine Spolar, the New York Times international business editor, when I proposed visiting an oil field called Tengiz in Kazakhstan.
Still, I had been intrigued with Tengiz for years, partly because of occasional talks with Todd Levy, Chevron’s president for Europe, Eurasia and the Middle East, who ran the field a few years ago. What I had heard was that it was — if there is such a thing — an almost perfect oil field. A giant that, it seemed, would never stop producing.
Chevron values Tengiz enough that — along with partners that include Exxon Mobil — it is sinking $37 billion more into the field, even though Tengiz had already been producing oil for more than a quarter of a century. This seemed to be the largest single undertaking in the oil industry, and I was curious whether it might be one of the last of the giant projects.
And so in late May, I found myself at the Renaissance Atyrau hotel, which has become a kind of way-station for oil people traveling in and out of Tengiz. Two days later, I was on one of the propeller-driven planes that shuttles between the oil field and Atyrau, a provincial capital on the steppes that has become Kazakhstan’s oil city.
The pilot flew on beyond the field and over the Caspian Sea, and the scale of what Chevron is attempting became more apparent. To bring in equipment, the partners have dredged a ship channel through the blue-green waters and built a new port. With the spoils from the dredging, the companies have constructed a series of islands, which, they say, attract seals and sea birds.
Up close, Tengiz is big in many ways. The oil-bearing rock is an ancient reef buried deep below the salt flats and scrub that stretches under an area of about 12 miles by 13 miles. Oil layers a mile thick — far greater than most other fields — are one reason output can still grow after a quarter-century of production.
The sea itself is shallow and marshy, and the wind blows the water around so what is covered one day may not be the next. “I’ve been in the maritime industry for 40 years, and this is the strangest place I have ever worked,” said Mark Bacon, a shipping manager.
At night, Nanna Heitmann, a photographer, and I settled into a vast complex of star-shaped dormitories. Long buildings with sleeping quarters holding a total of 5,000 beds led into circular structures where meals were served.
My room was clean but basic with a single bed, a wooden desk and a closet. The only decoration was a rug with the letters T.C.O. woven into it for Tengizchevroil, the company that runs the field. Uniformed security people were on patrol, opening and shutting doors and making the floors creak at night.
To our surprise, there were bars that served beer and wine. One evening Ms. Heitmann, who speaks Russian, which is the language of business in Kazakhstan, arranged for us to be invited to a birthday party thrown by a group of young workers. With their holidays coming soon, they were shaking off weeks of tight control and rules in a beery cigarette-fueled blowout.
Many of the people at Tengiz work a 28-days-on, 28-days-off rotation. It sounds like a lot of vacation, but long days are required on the job. Occasions like spouses’ birthdays and Christmas are missed, and it is easy to see how years of life in these camps could wear on the soul.
On the other hand, there was a sense around the oil field that Tengiz was “one of the most exciting projects and places to be on the planet,” as Jim Mayeaux, a senior construction manager, said. Word had come to people like Tom Koren, the chief engineer, from higher up the oil hierarchy that they would be wise to sign up.
Would it be the last project? Probably not. But Mike Rogers, a seasoned executive at Fluor, one of the main contractors, noted that there were “a lot of gray hairs” on this job. For these veterans the campaign on the Caspian might well be their last.
Along with Tengiz, there are two other monster oil fields around the Caspian, Kashagan and Karachaganak. They dominate the Kazakh economy, and Tengiz, especially, has paid the bills for Nursultan Nazarbayev, who ran the country since independence in the 1990s before stepping into the background earlier this year.
Oil has underpinned an autocratic government with little tolerance for dissent. The people around the oil fields have also paid a price. Villages have been cleared to make way for drilling and to distance their residents from toxic pollution.
The industry has made Atyrau a boomtown. The oil companies have the wherewithal to offer rewarding career paths to young people in a country where opportunities might otherwise be limited. Tengiz Alimbayev, a 33-year-old engineer, listed the various training programs available, including English lessons. “You are still paid” as if you were working, he said with a chuckle.
