Gennady Podolsky, a travel agent based in Chicago, was charged on Wednesday with 12 counts of wire fraud in connection with what prosecutors describe as a 13-month scheme in which he accrued 42 million Delta SkyBonus points, valued at more than $1.75 million.
SkyBonus points are earned through a corporate loyalty program through which companies can accrue points that can be redeemed for free flights and rewards from the airline. According to the indictment, filed on Wednesday in United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Mr. Podolsky created a SkyBonus account for a corporation called RGI International with which he is not affiliated.
Mr. Podolsky, 43, would link flights that he booked for clients of Vega International Travel Services, where he worked as a travel agent, to RGI International’s SkyBonus account, allowing him to “fraudulently accrue” points, the indictment said.
“Mr. Podolsky’s conduct relating to that program was not fraudulent,” his lawyer, Seth D. Kirschenbaum, said in a statement, adding that “the suggestion that Mr. Podolsky’s conduct somehow disadvantaged his clients is equally unfounded.”
“We’re happy to see any kind of fraud indicted and continue to work with the F.B.I. and the U.S. Attorney’s Office to make sure this case is prosecuted to its fullest extent,” the airline said in an emailed statement on Friday.
Mr. Podolsky is accused of running the scheme from March 2014 to April 2015, during which time he was a managing partner and the lead travel agent at Vega International, according a news release from the office of United States Attorney Byung J. Pak.
Airlines are often being swindled through loyalty programs that provide points to frequent fliers, according to Scott Mayerowitz, executive news director at The Points Guy, which provides tips on travel.
To give a sense of how many points 42 million is, a big credit card sign-up bonus would be 100,000, according to Mr. Mayerowitz. A 50,000-point bonus is more common, he said, “and people are happy with that.”
