The American International Group has found another executive willing to come out of retirement to take on the thankless task of leading a troubled insurer that was brought to the brink of financial collapse before being rescued through multibillion-dollar bailouts from the government.
A.I.G.’s board on Monday named Robert H. Benmosche, a former head of MetLife, to be chief executive of the company. He will take over from Edward M. Liddy, who was brought in by the government last year but has faced the task of defending a company that became a political symbol of excess on Wall Street.
Mr. Liddy is stepping down after 10 grueling months with a salary of $1 a year. Mr. Benmosche’s pay package was not released but the company will have to disclose his employment contract in a regulatory filing.
Mr. Liddy took on the job of chairman and chief executive of A.I.G. as a form of public service, but was castigated by members of Congress who seemed unable to separate him from the financial turmoil that he was trying to address. Even he said that the job was too big and complex as currently designed.
In March, for instance, A.I.G. was criticized for paying retention bonuses to people in its financial products unit, the division that sold the credit-default swaps that nearly brought A.I.G. to financial ruin.
The bonus contracts were arranged before Mr. Liddy took charge last September, but angry members of Congress attacked the payouts as a waste of taxpayer money. Several employees of the unit were named in news articles and hounded by the public and shunned by their neighbors.
Afterward, the recipients of the bonuses complained that Mr. Liddy had not adequately come to their defense. Of the $165 million earmarked for these bonuses, some was returned by employees after the controversy.
Since then, A.I.G. has sought the guidance of the Obama administration’s pay czar, Kenneth Feinberg, on a variety of issues, including compensation for some of its top-ranked employees. Mr. Benmosche, 65, will take over from Mr. Liddy on Aug. 10. He will become a director but will not be chairman. The company said Mr. Benmosche was not available to comment.
Mr. Benmosche previously worked at PaineWebber, where he oversaw the takeover of another troubled firm, the former brokerage house Kidder Peabody. He also worked in various positions at Chase Manhattan Bank from 1976 to 1982.
