It’s most definitely a nasty digital world out there these days. But it’s not just President Trump and his daily dose of toxic tweets. Or the insane conspiracy theories that cycle through social media like raggedy-edged tornadoes, causing damage that is impossible to fix. Or the endless flood of news that flashes so fast past your eyes like bright headlights on a dark road that it brings only blinding disorientation and little illumination.
Which is why, sometimes really late at night when it is quiet, I think about an alternate universe for the internet: one in which the internet actually managed to remain a pretty nifty place, as it was in the early days.
In its earliest incarnation, the kaleidoscope of a microblogging platform was rich with quirky communities, wonderful memes and, most of all, where vibrant creativity once reigned and often astonished. It was one of the most delightful places one could be at the time.
I am not, of course, talking about today’s Tumblr, which was bought this week by WordPress’s parent company, Automattic, from Verizon, which had bought AOL, which had bought Yahoo, which had originally bought Tumblr for $1.1 billion in 2013.
Yahoo’s acquisition of Tumblr caused a giant hubbub in the social media space after it was heralded by Yahoo’s chief executive at the time, Marissa Mayer, as the cornerstone in her plot to take over the digital media world. She promised not to meddle with Tumblr’s magic and not “screw it up.”
Oops. It was soon meddled with and screwed with a lot by a series of owners. Its slow decline is a fact that should have come as no surprise to anyone, given the sloppy handovers from one brain-numbing corporate entity to another over the years, as well as a series of vexing internal and external challenges it could not easily overcome.
The price today? It reportedly sold for as low as $3 million, which many have pointed out is about what one will pay for a middling Silicon Valley dwelling. Ha. Ha. Ha. Sigh, because such a joke is peak 2019, even though the minuscule sale is hardly the point anymore.
This was not the fate anyone imagined when Tumblr was founded in early 2007 by David Karp and Marco Arment. It quickly became the brightest in a flurry of truly innovative social media developments of the time. Pronounced “tumbler,” it allowed users to post all kinds of short-form blogs called tumblelogs, which could be followed by others.
And tumble they did, especially the much-coveted teen demo and also the more fringe types who had no interest in the dull blue suburb that was the then 3-year-old Facebook. Unlike that site, which its founder, Mark Zuckerberg, called a “utility,” Tumblr was the hippest club in town, attracting wonderful blogs like Scanwiches (yes, scans of sandwiches) and Garfield Minus Garfield (just what it sounds like) and one of my faves, which I could really relate to at the time, called STFU Parents (“You used to be fun. Now you have a baby.”) And so much terrific art and so many amazing photos and a cornucopia of funny bits and pieces of just about everything.
I even had (and still have) what is now a moribund blog there, called “Graffiti From the Gods,” which I explained a decade ago: “I find signs everywhere. On sidewalks. On walls. Sometimes misspelled. I cannot ignore them. So it is written, so it shall be posted.”
I really enjoyed posting there. And why not? The always twitchy Twitter had only started the year before with significantly fewer bells and whistles and, more to the point, the social networks that would really supplant Tumblr — Instagram and Snapchat — would not appear for several years. That left the field to Tumblr.
Thus, it quickly got its lofty valuation with $125 million in investments from tech’s smartest investors and took off. It hit a billion blog posts by 2010, and when the site started accepting advertising in 2012, Tumblr seemed golden.
Fool’s gold. What plagues the internet today hit Tumblr hard and early. There were the inevitable copyright problems and spam and security problems and product problems. And the content itself, which started as edgy, got rather gnarly, from self-harm sites to neo-Nazis to what really tanked Tumblr: sex.
The very fast growth of sites that were soon deemed pornographic got to be a too large part of the site, a development that got a lot of attention in the frenzy of the Yahoo purchase. While some of those blogs were seen as safe havens to explore sexuality, there was too much hard-core pornography — and that did not fly in a corporate setting.
There was no good way of making that stuff disappear, although Tumblr tried to a lot of ways — from using filters, to making the safe mode the default, to outright bans of sex acts and more. But terrible stuff inevitably slipped through, even causing Apple to pull Tumblr’s mobile app in 2018 when child pornography showed up.
Those controversies, the restrictions and the growth of nimbler social media rivals took its toll and user numbers declined. While Mr. Arment had left early, Mr. Karp stuck around until late 2017, and then he was gone too.
Fast forward to now, Tumblr has landed with WordPress, a former rival and the kind of company that it probably should have been with all along. The blogging software site’s founder, Matt Mullenweg, is one of tech’s most earnest entrepreneurs and also someone whose ethos has hewed most closely to the time when the internet was a lot more innocent. He also has bought the longform journalism site Longreads and seems to be creating group of properties that could become a creative oasis in these times of parched civility.
That is presumably why Mr. Mullenweg has kept the overall pornography ban on Tumblr, even if it has led to defections and outcries by some of the company’s communities. He’s still left with what is a very big platform of hundreds of millions of blogs and visitors for a very low price.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.
