The Sears Holdings Corporation, the parent of Sears and Kmart, reported an unexpected $56 million first-quarter loss on Thursday, dealing another setback to Edward S. Lampert, the billionaire hedge fund manager who has struggled to turn the company around.
When Mr. Lampert combined Kmart and Sears in 2005, he planned to join the strength of the Sears brands, like Kenmore appliances and Craftsman tools, with the attractive locations of Kmart stores. But the combination has failed to produce either the financial or retailing benefits he envisioned. A cutback in consumer spending and a slumping housing market have complicated his restructuring efforts.
The quarterly loss amounted to 43 cents a share, a sharp reversal compared with a profit of $223 million, or $1.45 a share, in the period a year earlier. Revenue fell 6 percent, to $11.1 billion. Shares of Sears tumbled $3.22, or 3.6 percent, to $86.14, near the 52-week low of $86.02 on Jan. 15.
Cash flow from the company’s stores as well as the value of its real estate had been the justifications for its lofty stock price. But as the real estate market has plummeted and competitors like Wal-Mart and TJX have become increasingly competitive, Sears has suffered. Same-store sales plummeted both at Sears and at Kmart outlets, with sales down 9.8 percent at Sears and 7.1 percent at Kmart. Total domestic comparable same-store sales fell 8.6 percent.
Mr. Lampert’s hedge fund is the largest single shareholder of Sears, with 65.6 million shares, or 49.6 percent of the company. Although he does not disclose performance figures for his hedge fund, it was down about 26 percent last year. So far this year, it was off about 1.2 percent through the end of April, according to one investor who declined to be identified. A spokesman for Mr. Lampert declined to comment.
Mr. Lampert has said publicly that he does not think that same-store sales are the most important measure for retail performance and that he prefers to look at cash flow. Still, the company’s adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization fell to $208 million in the quarter compared with $594 million a year earlier.
In the past, some real-estate experts have wondered whether the value of the Sears and Kmart real estate, which had been seen as the real value of the company, could be hurt because Sears has not made significant capital investment in the properties.
The current real-estate crisis may have compounded that problem. Mr. Flickinger pointed out that with the exception of properties in Canada, it appeared that Sears’s real estate values had been dropping drastically.
Meanwhile, same-store sales are the most obvious measure of Sears’s ability to compete with rivals, he said. “They are the lifeblood of a successful retail store base, and you can’t go more than five to seven years with big negative same-store declines and not have an uncertain future.”
Some analysts have been critical of Mr. Lampert’s extensive cost-cutting. “We expect this to be the worst retail recession in 35 years,” Mr. Flickinger said. “Sears cut working capital, they cut inventory, they cut capital expense for short-term gains, which accrues long-term pain. ”
In a report published Thursday, Carol Levenson, an analyst at Gimme Credit, wrote, “The goal of making the merged Kmart and Sears into a retailing success has become increasingly less achievable, as same-store sales plunge and excuses abound.”
Gary Balter, a Credit Suisse analyst who had recommended Sears Holdings some time ago, said he “used to have a buy on the stock because of the underlying values of the assets including real estate and brand value.”
