Three former executives of the Archer Daniels Midland Company, including the son of its former chairman, Dwayne Andreas, were sentenced today to terms ranging from two to two and a half years in prison for their roles in a worldwide scheme to fix prices of a feed additive manufactured by the company.
Michael Andreas, the former vice chairman and heir apparent at the company, and Terrance Wilson, the retired chief of its corn processing division, were sentenced to two years and ordered to pay the maximum fine of $350,000 each.
A third former executive, Mark Whitacre, was sentenced to two and a half years, but not ordered to pay a fine. Mr. Whitacre, who is already serving nine years in prison for illegally taking millions of dollars from Archer Daniels, was ordered to serve 20 months of the new sentence on top of his current term.
The sentences handed down by Federal Judge Blanche Manning added a new twist to a series of events that have bedeviled the case from the beginning: Mr. Whitacre, who received the longest sentence, was also the Government informant who alerted Federal investigators to the price-fixing conspiracy in 1992.
In a ruling that perplexed prosecutors, Judge Manning determined that Mr. Whitacre was a manager of the conspiracy, which under the Federal guidelines for sentencing requires an increase in his prison term. But she ruled that neither Mr. Andreas nor Mr. Wilson, who prosecutors contended were the masterminds of the scheme, had controlling roles. Judge Manning did not explain the reasons for her decision.
The case has had an enormous impact on Archer Daniels, whose influence extends to almost every grocery store aisle. For decades, the grain giant was run as a virtual family fiefdom under the iron-fisted control of Dwayne Andreas, one of the nation's most politically powerful executives, who is known to Presidents and prime ministers alike.
But as details of the criminal investigation of the company emerged -- as well as evidence of the involvement in the conspiracy of an Andreas family member -- the company was placed under enormous pressure to become more open and responsive to shareholders. In 1996, the company pleaded guilty to price fixing and paid a $100 million fine. Dwayne Andreas has since retired, turning the reins of the company over to his nephew, G. Allen Andreas.
Nonetheless, the prosecutors expressed disappointment at Judge Manning's ruling that neither Mr. Andreas nor Mr. Wilson was in charge of the conspiracy, and some confusion about why she held that Mr. Whitacre was.
The puzzlement about the ruling stems in part from the evidence presented at trial. Mr. Whitacre was only liable for his actions during the time before he informed the Government of the scheme. Based on the trial evidence, only two price-fixing meetings took place in that period, and Mr. Whitacre took a back seat to Mr. Wilson in both instances.
Bill Walker, a lawyer for Mr. Whitacre, said that he was stunned by the sentence. ''I'm taken aback by it,'' he said. ''I'm still in the blizzard, trying to figure this out.'' Lawyers for Mr. Andreas and Mr. Wilson said that they were disappointed by the outcome, but that they planned to appeal the verdict.
Mr. Whitacre first alerted the Government to price fixing at Archer Daniels in 1992. For the next two and a half years, he worked as a Government informant, secretly recording meetings with competitors and conversations at the highest reaches of the company.
Soon after raids on Archer Daniels in 1995, Mr. Whitacre was discredited as a witness, and he eventually lost his immunity from prosecution when it was disclosed that he had been illegally taking millions of dollars from the company, even while working as an informant. Mr. Whitacre contended that the money was provided as part of an under-the-table bonus plan at the company, but Government investigators concluded that was not true. In 1997, Mr. Whitacre pleaded guilty to fraud and was sentenced to prison.
At yesterday's hearing, Mr. Andreas spoke publicly for the first time since the investigation began. Reading from a statement, he portrayed himself as having been blindsided by new Government interpretations of antitrust rules.
But Government prosecutors dismissed that notion. They pointed to a videotape of a meeting between executives from Archer Daniels and Ajinimoto, a Japanese competitor, that was shown at the trial. In the tape, made in October 1993, Mr. Andreas directed an effort to allocate shares of the lysine market in the coming year, a critical element of a price-fixing conspiracy.
Before his sentencing, Mr. Wilson made no attempt to deny his responsibility. ''When you find yourself in a hole, quit digging, and I have no intention of making it deeper and wider,'' he said to Judge Manning. ''I accept total and complete responsibility for my actions.''
