Dwayne O. Andreas, who directed the transformation of the Archer Daniels Midland Corporation from a modest regional grain processor to a global agribusiness giant, yesterday stepped down as chairman of the company after more than a quarter of a century at the helm.
Mr. Andreas, who will remain tied to the company as chairman emeritus and a member of the board, was succeeded by his nephew, G. Allen Andreas, who has served as chief executive of the company for almost two years.
Wall Street analysts had widely expected the succession, a fact that in itself may be the final testament to the influence retained by Dwayne Andreas, long one of the most powerful and politically connected executives in America.
Over the last four years, Mr. Andreas saw his hopes of turning the corporate reins over to his son Michael shatter amid a price-fixing scandal. That scandal, which resulted in the conviction of Michael and two other executives on Federal antitrust charges, raised questions among some institutional shareholders about the future role of the Andreas family in the company.
But Mr. Andreas, who is now 80 years old, threw his influence behind his nephew, a respected executive who had won plaudits from his efforts to build Archer Daniel's business in Europe. By 1997, with the approval of company directors, Dwayne Andreas turned the job of chief executive over to Allen, telling friends that he intended to continue as chairman for a year or two.
Since that time, analysts said, Dwayne Andreas has been taking less and less of a role in the daily operations of the company, ceding those duties to his nephew. In essence, these analysts said, yesterday's announcement merely formalizes the role established in recent years.
With his new duties, Dwayne Andreas will continue exerting an enormous level of influence at the company. ''Anybody who thinks that Dwayne Andreas is going to try out for captain of his shuffleboard team is sadly mistaken,'' Mr. Teitelbaum said. ''He is too big an influence in worldwide agriculture.''
In an interview, Allen Andreas said that he expects to continue working closely with his uncle. ''It's a great opportunity for both of us,'' he said. ''He and I have been close associates, and I expect to continue to use his wise advice and counsel.''
Dwayne Andreas's decision to step down crystallized over the Christmas holidays, according to friends and directors. ''He just decided it was time,'' said Robert Strauss, an Archer Daniels director and former chairman of the Democratic Party. ''I don't think he had to wrestle with it. He just woke up one day and it felt like the right thing to do.''
According to participants in yesterday's board meeting, the votes to accept the resignation and name a new chairman were followed by several directors offering plaudits to Dwayne Andreas. Mr. Strauss praised him for his ability to move so easily through different worlds -- agricultural, political and international. Andrew Young, the former United Nations Representative, told of Mr. Andreas's anonymous contributions of money to rebuild black churches when they were being subjected to arson.
Directors and analysts said that the transfer of power to a new generation should be particularly important now, as falling margins are creating new challenges for agriculture companies. ''Allen is more youthful,'' Mr. Webb said in an interview, ''And that vigor is a positive thing for us right now with all the dynamics that are happening in the agricultural industry.''
Dwayne Andreas, who a company spokeswoman said was not available for comment, has been part of the industry since childhood. The son of Mennonite farmers, he helped build a family feed company, and later joined Cargill Inc. as an executive. Long before globalization became the mantra of corporate America, he pushed agricultural companies to seek new markets overseas -- indeed, a dispute about his desire to seek new business in the then Soviet Union contributed to his departure from Cargill.
He joined Archer Daniels in 1965, and within five years, was named chairman and chief executive. Over the decades that followed, Mr. Andreas built the company's financial fortunes and political influence. Mr. Andreas considered courting politicians as part of his job. With an ease that bred envy among other corporations, Mr. Andreas helped navigate Archer Daniels between the Republicans and Democrats while helping to form this country's agricultural policies.
Renowned for generosity in political contributions, the company, Mr. Andreas and his family forged ties with politicians from Hubert Humphrey to Ronald Reagan; Bill Clinton to Newt Gingrich. In the 1972 campaign, it was $25,000 contributed to the Nixon campaign from Dwayne Andreas that ended up in the bank account of a Watergate burglar.
The price-fixing scandal arose in 1995, when Federal agents raided the company's headquarters in Decatur, Ill. It soon emerged that a senior executive, Mark Whitacre, had been working as an informant for the Government, secretly taping price-fixing meetings.
