CLARIFICATION 5:55 p.m. – The story below references a Dell ad placed in UptownLife magazine. The online version of that ad, which has since been removed, appeared to include both an image from Dell and text. A Dell spokesman, Bob Kaufman, said that Dell was only confirming the “Adamo by Dell” image and not the text, which is quoted in this post.
“Rumor has it that Dell is coming out with a computer called Adamo that will rival the MacBook Air,” the blog post read. “At press time, the company was keeping the product tightly under wraps, but PC users rejoice – word on the street is that something cool is coming your way.”
After my Bits post about Adamo appeared, UptownLife pulled its post down, and Dell refused to discuss the exact nature of the product with reporters. This left most publications guessing about Adamo, saying it could be anything from a thin laptop to perhaps another netbook or a music player.
On Tuesday, the Dell spokesman, Mr. Kaufman, confirmed that the Adamo blurb art was in fact a Dell ad. So, it’s Dell that has been talking about a product that will “rival the MacBook Air” all along. The UptownLife Web site just made things tricky by lumping blog posts and ads together without making any distinction between the two. (As the clarification notes, Dell is now only confirming the Adamo by Dell image and not the text discussing the rival to the MacBook Air.)
Dell is Hyundai to Apple’s BMW. They can copy it and put out a poor version, just in time for Apple’s upgraded version to blow it out of the water. Dell has been and always will be just a slave to Windows and Intel and can only produce their products.
What the world (read “I am”) is waiting for is a laptop with XP (Vista is a cruel joke), 6 to 8 hours of real battery life, 12 to 13 inch screen with good resolution (not the 1028 x 600 that we get now in netbooks), 128 GB of disk (SSD would be nice), full size keyboard (not 90%), and NO removable drive (takes space, isn’t needed, and costs money).
As someone who struggled for decades with Windows 3.1 through and including XP (and that cow turd, WinMo on almost a dozen handsets), I would never again want to waste time using any OS from the Redmond Bloatfarm. Who needs the daily aggravation and agita?
Have you all forgotten that Dell is offering right now several PC and servers with a bunch of Linux distros preinstalled? PC doesn’t mean Windows, that’s just Apple’s point. And if we stick to the real meaning of PC (personal computer), Macs ARE pc…
This should be interesting, since Apple left the door WIDE OPEN for the competition. If it has a removable battery, more than one USB port, and Firewire, it’ll be much better than the MacBook Air offereing. Plus the Dell offering won’t be over-priced like most Apple products, and it’ll run applications that actually are productive for business versus eye-candy-but-not-so-useful OS-X options.
That said this article was about the hardware. The Air is a joke – for the price it doesn’t even have a dvd drive?? So unless the Dell has a DVD drive I don’t see the value if it ends up costing the same. Someone mentioned $600 – that’d be a great price point but I don’t think it’ll happen. As with any hardware these days, the smaller and sleeker, the more expensive.
After owning several PCs (including a Compaq laptop running Windows 2000 and a Dell PC running Windows XP), and most recently a MacBook, I’m of the opinion that the only way in which Apple is superior to the Microsoft/PC-Manufacturer Complex (as Apple partisans usually frame the debate) is in aesthetic (not industrial) design and marketing.
Running the latest version of Mac OS X with 1GB of RAM, my MacBook freezes and slows down just as often as my previous PC’s, plus I’m unable to stream several formats of online video or install many of my preferred software.
The computer you describe as your desire is available today; the Lenovo ThinkPad X200. Just won ultra-portable of the year from PC Mag. Full power dual core intel processor, 12.1in 1200×800 screen, full keyboard, thin with no on board optical drive.
Why are Mac fanatics so vicious. If your system is so cool and the best then just be mellow about it . Keep low key. Don’t hate the players hate the game. There enough room for all out here. Oh and by the way Al Macs run on intel now in case you didn’t know. Oh wait forgot you are a mac person you spend most of your time trying to figure out how to shoot down the PC because they ain’t much to do on that MAC huh. She is cute but gives a very bad BJ. LMAO.
Is this bitterness from ‘M’ac ‘B’arbie full of ‘A’ir fans I sense? Why are you so afraid? Must be because the only two full of Airs in stock on the local shop from the day they got them still are sitting on their shelves. Dell, on the other hand, as putted delicately; Hyundai, sells like toast. So who gives a rotten apple about a rotten apple if they are just not selling full of Airs.
First off, let me say I own a MacBook air, and I love it. I also own a Dell Media Center PC and I love it too. I’ve owned several Macs and Several PCs and I can tell you both have their pluses and minuses. Macs have stylish bodies, and attractive looking operating systems. However, they simply cannot match match the pure practicality of a Windows PC. A lot of Mac Fans say that a Mac can do just as much as a PC, when that just isn’t the case. For college students, and Home users a Mac is just fine. But for office bees and power users, I see a more attractive dell a huge step forward!
1. Such a machine would be most welcome. It would combine the weight factor of netbooks (or better) with a keyboard factor of standard notebooks (some of us have large hands). 2a. It would be even better if it ran Vista. I have been using computers since the CP/M days, and I find Vista far and away preferrable to XP (not a revolutionary change, just better–it’s worked with everything I’ve thrown at it thus far). The XP folks are screaming about Vista for the same reason the 2000 folks whined about XP. It’s just that there are a lot more users now, so they whine LOUDER. 2b. Don’t talk to me about Macs. My son uses one, but I see no advantage and find the interface somewhat clunky. Clunky, but not that different from Windows. Some things it does better, some it does worse, most it just differently. 3. Back to the machine…while Dell has tripped up a few times, if it can introduce a thin, light machine in the $600-700 range or below, it will revolutionize the notebook marketplace. The netbooks are close, but still regarded as toys because of their tiny screens and keyboards..they are small, but thin is better. 4. And it shouldn’t have a DVD drive. Apple was right about that–think about the number of times you’ve used yours…it’s vanishingly small. The important stuff is available on-line, and the stuff that isn’t? You can find a networked machine (or will soon be able to) for that. Backup? A USB hard drive if you’re totally paranoid, a big memory stick otherwise. Wireless N is a must, as is bluetooth. And unlike the Air, an easily user-replaced battery would be nice. For such a “personal” machine, sound could be available only via headset–plug it into speakers via USB when you want sound, and save on the room and power consumption for an amp and speakers.
“…for is a laptop with XP (Vista is a cruel joke), 6 to 8 hours of real battery life, 12 to 13 inch screen with good resolution (not the 1028 x 600 that we get now in netbooks), 128 GB of disk (SSD would be nice), full size keyboard (not 90%), and NO removable drive (takes space, isn’t needed, and costs money)….”
Timex, on the other hand, had a gimmick and invented a new marketing paradigm in the 1950s based upon this gimmick. Timex had started out in the mid-19th century as the Waterbury Clock Company, making standard, high quality Connecticut-style brass movement clocks. But in the 1950s, they decided to try a new tack: Make semi-disposable wristwatches, under the Timex brand, with really cheap, generic, irreparable movements but put them in the best, most attractive cases they could make and load them up with really clever, innovative and useful features, such as electroluminescent dials, which are inexpensive to produce. In other words, Timex focused on something other than the basis of their product, the product’s look and feel, rather than focusing on the actual guts of the timepiece, itself.
Don’t get me wrong; I don’t dislike Apple products. As with any other company, I evaluate their products on their merits. In other words, I’m not a knee-jerk Apple hater any more than I’m a knee-jerk Windows hater, something the vast majority of brand partisans should emulate, I believe.
But I have done something that most computer users don’t do: I’ve opened every computer I’ve ever owned and many dozens of others left with me by clients, friends and family members, for my computer experience goes all the way back to 1966 and I can often make routine repairs.
Based upon my experience, including examining and attempting to repair the guts of many Apple laptops, I can say without any hesitation that the Apple hardware which cannot be seen is, alas, rather low-end, just like cheap, 1950s Timex movements, with their stamped- rather than machined parts. Dell systems, on the other hand, are not as flashy, in general, as Apple systems, nor as interesting to some. But Dell (to use just your example) makes really solid systems. Dell systems are easily extensible, Apple systems are much less so. Dell guts are very high-end and solid, even though their don’t look like anything much on the outside. Best of all, Dell systems are easily reparable, just as Apple systems are barely so.
This has nothing to do with software, of course. But software quality really has nothing much to do with hardware quality and hardware quality has nothing much to do with clever hardware design and feature set.
Vista isn’t a bad operating system, its just a RAM sucker. The only computer i have ever used vista on that was reasonable, was my macbook with 4GB of DDR3 in it. Any notebook that size from dell couldn’t have more than a GB, and I doubt they will ship it with XP, so whats the point? Unless they get a contract with apple for OS X but then all you windows users still wouldn’t be happy. I don’t know what they are going to accomplish by this.
