Soon, hundreds of thousands of tennis fans will converge at the Billie Jean King National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows, Queens, for the United States Open Tennis Championship, Aug. 26 through Sept. 8.
The competition this year promises some high stakes action. Will the American teenager Cori ‘Coco’ Gauff, the feel-good story of Wimbledon, make it past the early rounds? Could Roger Federer, 38, snag his 21st grand slam title? Will Serena Williams, 37, finally tie Margaret Court’s slam record of 24?
The crowds at the U.S. Open, however, can be overwhelming for even the most tennis-obsessed. Luckily there are spots — granted, many of them overseen by corporate sponsors — inside and outside the grounds that can provide a bit of an oasis, should tennis burnout strike.
Armstrong has a retractable roof, meaning that play will never get delayed by the weather. It’s also built of overlapping terra cotta panels that circulate air between the stadium decks. The natural ventilation means that the stadium can remain cool even when it’s scorching hot outside.
A ticket is required to sit on the lower levels, but the upper levels are open to anyone with a grounds pass. There is no such thing as a bad seat there. The food and merchandise vendors also seem to be less crowded than those outside the stadium.
Visitors with Amex accounts can have their hair and makeup touched up or their shoes cleaned for free. And for members of the general public, who are welcome to walk through the main area for a blast of air conditioning, there are also interactive activities, like creating a mural with tennis rackets that splatter paint.
Heineken’s Red Star Patio Cafe, with its bright green stools and spacious tables just east of Arthur Ashe Stadium, is known among tournament regulars as a casual option for those who like to socialize.
This suite is usually invitation only. But this year, social media-savvy fans can win tickets to sit in the suite during the men’s and women’s finals, by following Grey Goose on Twitter and Instagram @GreyGoose.
Exhausted stadium visitors can take the 7 train all the way to its last stop in Hudson Yards, where matches will be broadcast on large screens in a beer garden at the Crowne Plaza HY36 (320 W 36th Street). The hotel will even serve a cocktail honoring Ms. Gauff, with cocoa and crème de menthe.
Nearby, at the Kimpton Hotel Eventi (851 Sixth Avenue, between 29th and 30th Streets), there is a plaza with a 30-foot screen on the side of a building. Known as the Big Screen Plaza, it too will be showing the matches.
The tennis center is actually part of the 897-acre Flushing Meadows-Corona Park. It is the fourth largest in New York City. The zoo is about a 15-minute stroll (head southeast toward United Nations Avenue North) from the main gate.
For over 60 years the Lemon Ice King of Corona, owned by the Benfaremo family, has been selling Italian ices at the edge of Flushing Meadows Corona Park. This is no ordinary iced treat. Lemons and oranges are squeezed for natural flavoring real pieces of fruit, from watermelon to blueberry, are used. Flavors range from peanut butter to rum raisin.
The 100,000-square-foot facility has several levels of water treatment and relaxation rooms. There is a hot cave with mats and a napping area, as well as reclining chairs with televisions, if that’s what you’re into.
Massage therapists will customize a treatment, maybe a mix of Swedish or deep tissue or a full body stretch? There are also food options and a full bar. Admission is $40 on the weekdays and $50 on the weekends.
