For years, researchers, activists and government officials have pointed to evidence that Exxon Mobil had in-depth knowledge of the risks of fossil fuels while misleading the public about the severity of climate change.
During the Democratic forum on climate change on Wednesday night, that issue got a prime-time airing. And Senator Kamala Harris of California got applause from the audience when she answered a question about climate “disinformation” spread by corporate interests.
An investigation, yes. A lawsuit, no. In 2016, The Los Angeles Times reported that Ms. Harris, then California’s attorney general, had begun an investigation into “whether Exxon Mobil Corp. repeatedly lied to the public and its shareholders about the risk to its business from climate change — and whether such actions could amount to securities fraud and violations of environmental laws.”
Ms. Harris’s comments on Wednesday drew the attention of fact-checkers like Daniel Dale of CNN, who noted that Ms. Harris had opened an investigation into the company and had sued other oil companies, but not Exxon.
Ian Sams, a spokesman for Ms. Harris, did not directly answer a question about whether she had sued Exxon Mobil. But, he said, “as attorney general she sued Chevron, BP, ConocoPhillips and Phillips 66 for pollution activities, helping win $50 million in settlements.” Ms. Harris had also filed criminal indictments against a pipeline company that “transported oil from several Exxon rigs,” he added.
In November 2015, The New York Times reported that the New York attorney general at the time, Eric T. Schneiderman, had opened an investigation into Exxon Mobil over whether its statements about climate change constituted shareholder fraud, among other issues.
New York sued Exxon Mobil last year, saying the company engaged in a “longstanding fraudulent scheme” to deceive investors, analysts and underwriters “concerning the company’s management of the risks posed to its business by climate change regulation.”
Many news organizations have looked into the ways that fossil fuel companies have funded questionable climate science and encouraged denial of climate change. In 2015, Inside Climate News and The Los Angeles Times published articles highlighting Exxon Mobil’s research into the risks of climate change that suggested it had incorporated the research into its planning, even though it funded groups from the 1990s to the mid-2000s that denied serious climate risks.
Richard Wiles, the executive director of the Center for Climate Integrity, a group that provides legal analysis and scientific information on climate issues, said, “Why would you believe that Harris is going to launch an investigation this time when she didn’t do it last time?”
But he said he was encouraged that claims of deception by fossil fuel companies had suddenly become part of a nationally televised political forum, calling it “an incredible transformation of the narrative in a really short period of time.”
