Late last week, Exxon Mobil announced that it had made an astonishing $39.5 billion in 2006. No company in history, not Microsoft, not Wal-Mart, has ever come close to making the kind of annual profit that this 134-year-old oil giant generated last year.
Wall Street, of course, liked them just fine. “Exxon Mobil continues to execute exceptionally well in just about all facets of its business,” wrote Arjun N. Murti of Goldman Sachs in a note to clients after the earnings report came out. “The company’s strong performance is in sharp contrast to almost all of its so-called super major peers.”
Exxon Mobil is the only major oil company to consistently replace its production over the last decade. It is the most technologically advanced energy producer, and the most disciplined. It has a far better safety record than, say, BP. It is unafraid to search for oil in the toughest spots on earth. You get the picture.
It is also a company that is unapologetically geared toward generating returns for its shareholders. Last year, Exxon Mobil spent almost $20 billion on capital expenditures — and almost $30 billion buying back its own stock, which helped bolster its stock price by more than 30 percent in 2006. It runs its finance department with the same rigor that it runs its offshore rigs. “Exxon Mobil,” Mr. Gheit said, “is the gold standard of the industry.”
Whenever gasoline prices are high, as they have been this last year or so, oil company profits generate enormous suspicion and ire, as people inevitably assume they are being ripped off by the oil companies. (Never mind that oil is a commodity and that the companies have about as much to do with setting the price of oil as farmers do with setting the price of corn.) Representative Edward J. Markey of Massachusetts, a ranking member of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, summed up the sentiments of many when he told me that “with oil at $70 a barrel, those are definitely windfall profits.” He complained, as many do, that oil companies aren’t spending nearly enough of their profits on alternative energy sources.
But even amid the general discontent over oil company profits, Exxon Mobil stands out as a special case. In recent times, it has managed to turn itself into a Wal-Mart-size target for the environmental set: the energy company all right-thinking people love to hate. On the Internet you’ll find sites like exxonsecrets.org, which is maintained by Greenpeace, and takes as its premise the notion that Exxon Mobil is at the heart of a vast conspiracy to sow doubt about global warming, and there’s Exxpose Exxon, a group set up by a coalition of environmental groups to put pressure on the company.
Partly, Exxon Mobil is a target simply because of its size. Partly, it’s because many of the very things that Wall Street likes about the company —its relentless focus on finding oil and gas, and the use of its cash to reward shareholders instead of plowing the money into, say, solar power — drives environmentalists nuts. And partly it is a legacy of the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill.
But most of all, Exxon Mobil has become the enemy because it has been slow to concede that global warming is a real phenomenon caused largely by human beings burning fossil fuels. Exxon Mobil opposed (and still opposes) the Kyoto accord. It has contributed money to Washington research groups that have cast doubt on the severity of global warming and on the need for taking drastic measures to reverse its effects. It has generally opposed mandatory caps on greenhouse gases. Even as BP and Royal Dutch Shell embraced the notion that the world needed to start doing something to mitigate the effects of global warming, Exxon Mobil held back.
The language its opponents use is amazingly harsh. Shawnee Hoover, who runs Exxpose Exxon, accused the company of using its might to finance what she called the “global warming deniers,” a phrase that seems meant to echo those awful words “Holocaust deniers.” The Union of Concerned Scientists has compared Exxon Mobil to the tobacco industry in its efforts to sow “disinformation” about the realities of global warming.
Most recently, Exxon Mobil has been accused of “bribing” scientists through one of the organizations it helps finance, the American Enterprise Institute, to cast doubt on the latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report. That’s the report that made headlines recently by saying there was a 90 percent certainty that human activities had been the main cause of global warming.
Some of the accusations hurled at Exxon Mobil are ridiculous — the “bribery” allegation turned out to be an effort by two American Enterprise Institute scholars to solicit articles from a range of global warming experts for a book they were putting together. They were paying $10,000 an article. (And Exxon Mobil, which contributes a minuscule portion of the group’s budget, knew nothing about the book until the accusations showed up in the papers.)
Some of Exxon Mobil’s arguments are, at the very least, defensible. For instance, it takes the view that over the next few decades, oil, gas and coal will still be the primary means of generating energy — and thus its focus on searching for oil and gas makes sense for the country and the world. It also argues that using fossil fuels more efficiently is more sensible, in the short term, than investing in wind power.
But it has done a bunch of really dumb things, for example, financing groups like the Competitive Enterprise Institute, which a few years ago (after Exxon stopped financing it) ran ads promoting the wonders of carbon dioxide. Lee Raymond, Exxon Mobil’s crusty former chief executive, used to scoff openly at environmentalists and alternative-energy efforts — and yes, even cast doubt on global warming. He almost seemed to enjoy being a foil for the other side.
But early last year, Mr. Raymond retired, and Exxon Mobil’s new chief executive, Rex W. Tillerson, is a kinder gentler sort. And with the broad scientific consensus on global warming — and the near certainty that the United States will soon be imposing some form of regulation on greenhouse gases — Exxon Mobil is finally trying to change its tune. At last month’s World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, Mr. Tillerson said during one of the 17 (that’s right: 17) panels on global warming: “It is clear that something is going on. It’s not useful to debate it any longer.”
What is striking to me, though, is that this same company that is so utterly competent at its core mission — finding, producing, refining and delivering oil and gas — is so utterly incompetent when it comes to making the case that it is not the devil incarnate when it comes to the environment.
I got a whiff of this earlier this week, when Kenneth P. Cohen, Exxon’s vice president for public affairs, held a conference call for reporters in an effort to refute those who say that the company is a nonbeliever in global warming. Mr. Cohen has worked at Exxon Mobil for 30 years, which is part of the problem: the place is so insular that its executives have a hard time understanding why everyone doesn’t love them.
But another part of the problem is that Exxon Mobil doesn’t want to acknowledge that it has ever been on the wrong side of the issue. When I spoke to him earlier, one on one, Mr. Cohen sounded pretty reasonable. He made the point that the world doesn’t really need Exxon Mobil to finance alternative energy efforts because scads of money is being thrown at it, starting with venture capitalists in Silicon Valley. “Renewable energy efforts are not being held back by a lack of capital,” he said.
He also complained that it was unfair to assume that Exxon Mobil held the puppet strings at the research institutions and other groups it financed. As a general rule, at a place like the American Enterprise Institute, it doesn’t.
But on the conference call, Mr. Cohen’s rhetoric turned to mush. He wouldn’t say that the company had made a mistake giving money to certain groups, and though he adamantly insisted that the company’s position was that human activity was a critical source of global warming — just as the panel on climate change’s report stated — he wouldn’t even concede that that was a change in Exxon Mobil’s position.
When a reporter dug up a 2004 report in which Exxon Mobil cast doubt on the cause of global warming, Mr. Cohen ducked the question. When asked if the company would accept mandatory caps on greenhouse gases, he responded with a firm maybe. And on, and on. By the end I was rolling my eyes.
As you can surely tell by now, I think there is a lot to admire about Exxon Mobil. For a very long time to come, we’re going to need it to do what it does better than any other company. But in the world we live in, that’s no longer good enough. Exxon Mobil’s insularity has made it a great oil company. But if it doesn’t learn to open up and talk more straightforwardly about its beliefs, it will never stop being the Company That Denies Global Warming. And being the world’s whipping boy isn’t a lot of fun. Just ask Wal-Mart.
