HOUSTON — Chevron positioned itself to become the dominant oil producer in the field that is driving the American shale revolution when it said on Friday that it was buying Anadarko Petroleum for $33 billion.
The acquisition is the largest takeover in the global oil industry in three years and signals that shale drilling, which was once dominated by small and nimble independent companies, has now become a battleground for oil giants. It also demonstrates that the largest oil companies believe that they can profitably drill in shale fields even when crude oil prices are much lower than they were a decade ago.
In buying Anadarko, Chevron is picking up major oil and natural gas projects in the Gulf of Mexico, Colorado, Mozambique, Algeria and Ghana. But most of all, it is building on its position in the Permian Basin of West Texas and New Mexico, which recently passed Saudi Arabia’s Ghawar field as the world’s most productive oil field.
More than a dozen oil and gas pipelines serving the Permian are expected to be completed by the middle of 2020, potentially increasing exports from the Gulf of Mexico region to eight million from two million barrels a day.
Anadarko and Chevron have a 75-mile stretch of contiguous acreage in the Permian, which should help the companies reduce production and transportation costs. About a third of total American oil production comes from the basin, which is largely responsible for the production and export boom of recent years.
Chevron, which is based in San Ramon, Calif., is the world’s 10th largest company producing oil and gas, and Texas-based Anadarko ranks 41st, according to Rystad Energy, a consulting firm. Once the merger is completed by the end of the year, Chevron will climb to seventh place, vaulting ahead of Royal Dutch Shell and BP. It will still trail Exxon Mobil, Saudi Aramco and four other national oil companies.
Per Magnus Nysveen, who heads research at Rystad, said that the deal would help Chevron emerge “as the clear leader among all Permian players, both in terms of production growth and as a cost leader.” He estimated that by 2025, the merged companies would produce as much as 1.6 million barrels of oil a day in the Permian alone — more than the total current production of Algeria, a leading member of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
The acquisition continues a trend toward more concentration of Permian production in the hands of giant oil companies, which in recent years had fallen behind dozens of smaller and more nimble independents like Anadarko.
Chevron’s move is the third major acquisition in the Permian over the last three years and there have been many smaller ones. Exxon Mobil made a $6.6 billion acquisition of 275,000 acres in Permian fields in New Mexico in 2017, making it the most active driller in the basin until now. Last year Concho Resources bought RSP Permian for $9.5 billion, transforming two companies little known outside of Texas into a big new player.
Share prices of other small and medium size Permian-based oil companies soared on the news of the deal, with speculation that another major oil company, particularly Royal Dutch Shell, would move to increase its holdings. Parsley Energy and Pioneer Natural Resources closed up more than 11 percent on Friday.
Over the last four years, the annual capital investment in the Permian by the three big oil companies — Chevron, Exxon Mobil and Shell — climbed to more than $8 billion from less than $2 billion, according to IHS Markit, the energy consultancy. Adding BP, which gained a foothold in the Permian last year, the oil giants are expected to invest more than $10 billion in that field this year.
“The bottom line is that the Permian is delivering for the majors, and they will keep pressing on that gas pedal,” said Raoul LeBlanc, IHS Markit’s executive director for energy. “Boundless capital allows them to invest heavily even as lower prices force smaller companies to retrench.”
The Permian produces roughly four million barrels of oil a day, slightly more than Ghawar. Saudi Aramco recently revealed in documents released as part of a bond sale that the daily production from that field was smaller than many people in the industry had estimated.
In addition to the Permian, Anadarko has been a leader in discovering and developing natural gas in Mozambique. Chevron engineers reviewed Anadarko’s project, and executives say they will keep Anadarko personnel there.
But the company’s increased investment in African natural gas comes as growing global supplies have pushed down prices. Big new discoveries in the Eastern Mediterranean and Africa could further depress prices in the coming years unless there is a big increase in demand. That demand would depend on more countries switching to gas from coal, which is the most widely used fuel in the power sector.
Chevron said it would pay $65 in cash and stock for each Anadarko share, a 39 percent premium over Thursday’s closing price. The deal is the largest in the energy industry since Shell’s acquisition of BG Group, the Britain-based oil and gas producer, for about $50 billion in 2016.
