The spinoff, which is expected to be completed by the first half of next year, follows similar moves by companies such as Marathon Oil. Refining and marketing, known in the industry as downstream operations, are seen as slower-growing businesses compared with offshore oil and gas exploration.
“We don’t see a lot of value in growing low-margin production,” James J. Mulva, ConocoPhillips’s chairman and chief executive, said in an analyst conference call. “We do think the pure plays are better understood in the marketplace, and it is going to put a lot more focus on our management and our leadership to accomplish their objective.”
Once the breakup is complete, Mr. Mulva, who has led ConocoPhillips since the 2002 merger that created it, will retire. Mr. Mulva spearheaded the company’s years-long buying spree, striking 31 deals since the union of Conoco and Phillips Petroleum, according to data from Capital IQ.
After the split, ConocoPhillips will remain focused on its exploration business, which already produces about 1.7 million barrels of oil equivalent a day and has more than eight billion barrels in reserves. The spun-off refinery operations will have a daily processing capacity of more than two million barrels, and will start life with positive cash flow that will be used for adding to infrastructure.
The company has not yet outlined what the management teams for the individual businesses will look like. It also has not yet decided what to do with its midstream assets, which include transportation and processing facilities.
Marathon benefited from the spinoff of its refining business because the company was trading at a 25 percent discount to the average of its peers, according to analysts at Morgan Stanley. ConocoPhillips already trades at a 15 percent premium.
“To us the ‘disintegration’ approach essentially represents a repudiation of the ‘buy and grow’ strategy that management has espoused since its creation nine years ago,” analysts at Société Générale wrote in a note on Thursday, maintaining a hold rating on the stock.
