PERTH, Australia — Origin Energy, fending off an $11 billion hostile bid from the BG Group of Britain, will spin off its coal-bed methane assets into a joint venture with the U.S. oil company ConocoPhillips.
Origin and Conoco separately said Monday that Conoco would contribute as much as $8 billion toward a joint venture that would develop the huge coal-seam gas assets and build a liquefied natural gas project.
A BG spokeswoman declined to comment on the move, but analysts said it could press the British producer to raise its bid of 15.50 Australian dollars, or $12.69, per share. The BG bid is aimed at enlarging the company's Asia-Pacific liquefied natural gas production arm to feed Asian sales.
"Obviously, ConocoPhillips's joining is a positive," said Peter Chilton, a fund manager with Constellation Capital Management, which does not own Origin shares. "I suppose it shows that there is good market out there for what Origin has got."
Conoco said it would pay $5 billion to the joint venture and would carry Origin Energy for their first 1.15 billion dollars in joint venture expenses. It will also pay $500 million into the venture when the partners agree to proceed with each phase of the planned four-phase project.
The deal would take the financial burden of developing the reserves away from Origin, whose main business currently is retailing power and natural gas. After the completion of the transaction, Origin said, it would pay a dividend of 25 cents, doubling the 2008 dividend, and commence a buyback of shares worth 1.275 billion dollars.
Conoco said it anticipated booking reserves equivalent to about 100 million barrels of oil from the joint venture in 2008, and the significant size of Origin's coal fields means it could make substantial additional sales in the years ahead.
Like most major oil companies, Conoco is struggling to add reserves as the biggest resource holders, like Saudi Arabia and Russia, restrict access, preferring to have their state oil companies develop their richest fields.
After its board rejected a friendly approach from BG at 15.50 dollars a share May 30, Origin invited proposals on how it could best exploit its coal-seam gas reserves, with options ranging from the sale of its natural gas assets to a partnership in a liquefied natural gas export project.
