By putting $5.5 billion into Mondelez International, a hedge fund billionaire is wagering that the company, which makes Oreos, Cadbury chocolates and Trident gum, could be prodded into selling itself.
Though Pershing Square’s regulatory filing on Thursday disclosing its 7.5 percent stake does not elaborate on the hedge fund’s investment thesis, a person briefed on the move has said that the firm believes Mondelez must cut costs, or consider a sale.
Mr. Ackman is said to like the aggressive cost-cutting measures announced by the company’s chief executive, Irene Rosenfeld, last year, according to another person with knowledge of Mr. Ackman’s thinking. Both people spoke on the condition of anonymity.
The cuts followed months of pressure from another activist investor, Nelson Peltz, who had built a stake of more than $1 billion in the company and suggested that Mondelez merge with PepsiCo’s Frito-Lay snack business. He later dropped the campaign and joined the Mondelez board.
Analysts on Thursday said that with Mondelez having already made headway in improving its operations — “we think many of the low-hanging Oreos already have been plucked,” Ken Goldman of JPMorgan Chase wrote in a research note — Mr. Ackman’s play must be pushing for a sale.
As a shift in consumer preference for more healthful foods bites into sales, traditional manufacturers are under pressure to improve their performance and cut costs. Upstarts like Chobani, the popular maker of Greek yogurt, have taken meaningful market share from traditional brands like Yoplait.
Moreover, while a number of big manufacturers abound, much of the business is still made up of smaller manufacturers, many of which are owned by families or foundations, said Alexia Howard, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein.
Mr. Ackman and his team see value in the vast array of brands in the Mondelez stable — which includes Ritz Crackers, Peek Freans and Chiclets, according to someone briefed on Pershing Square’s investment who also spoke on the condition of anonymity.
One natural defense would be for manufacturers to combine and shed production, marketing and delivery expenses. Getting bigger would also give those companies more negotiating leverage with retailers, helping their efforts to gain more space and greater prominence on supermarket shelves.
Still, the Kraft Heinz Company appears ready to be one of the main consolidators in the industry. The food giant was assembled by 3G Capital, the Brazilian-American investment firm that has made a fortune turning food and drink companies into acquisition machines.
The 3G playbook has wavered little over the years, but has proved enormously successful. It helped transform a collection of small breweries into Anheuser-Busch InBev. It also combined Burger King with Tim Hortons, a staple of the Canadian coffee-and-doughnut landscape.
In March, the firm used Heinz — which it bought two years ago with help from Warren E. Buffett — to buy Kraft, creating a colossus of packaged foods. Around the same time, Mr. Ackman set out to build his $5.5 billion stake in Mondelez.
“We are uncertain whether in the near term, 3G would be willing to add another massive integration to the current one (down the road, we think more deals for KHC are likely), given added execution risk,” Mr. Goldman, the JPMorgan analyst, wrote in a research note on Thursday, citing Kraft Heinz’s stock ticker.
Kraft Heinz only recently closed the merger that gave it life, and digesting that combination is likely to take at least a year. Another possible buyer, PepsiCo, with its Frito-Lay division, has shown no particular interest in a huge acquisition to bolster the snacks business.
Mondelez could do well on its own, too, say people knowledgeable about Mr. Ackman’s thinking. That gives Mondelez time to show more improvement in its results — “get its socks up,” as Ms. Howard put it — before facing a reckoning.
