Consolidated Edison and five of its insurers have filed a $314.5 million lawsuit against the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, asserting that huge diesel tanks in 7 World Trade Center, an office building that collapsed late in the day last Sept. 11, were improperly designed and maintained. The suit charges that fires fed by the fuel in those tanks played a major role in the collapse.
''The insurers are trying to recover what they paid to us and we're trying to recover some of our uninsured losses,'' said Chris Olert, a Con Edison spokesman. ''There was negligent design, inspection, maintenance and operation of the diesel fuel tanks there. The diesel tanks caused the building to collapse.''
The tanks contained more than 40,000 gallons of fuel to provide backup power for the city's emergency command center, a Secret Service office and other tenants. A 6,000-gallon tank for the command center, which was on the 23rd floor, was mounted 15 feet off the ground near an elevator bank. It was cited as unsafe by Fire Department officials in 1998 and 1999, but the Port Authority has asserted that the tank and the structure met the city's fire code and posed no special danger.
''The Port Authority has a longstanding policy that all of our buildings meet or exceed code,'' said the Port Authority's general counsel, Jeffrey Green, in a prepared statement. ''In this case, the design of the diesel fuel tanks in 7 W.T.C. had the approval of the city'' -- and, ultimately, of the Fire Department, he said.
When 7 World Trade Center crumbled at 5:28 p.m. last Sept. 11, it became the only modern, steel-reinforced high-rise in the United States ever to fall because of a fire alone. The precise cause of the collapse has remained elusive, but fiery debris from the towers struck 7 World Trade. And in a study released last spring, federal engineers suggested that fires fed by the diesel fuel damaged structural steel in the building and led to its destruction.
The Con Ed substation, built in 1970, stood about three stories high and included nine different transformers, Mr. Olert said. Seven World Trade, which began going up in 1984, rested on stout steel transfer trusses above the substation. The fires on Sept. 11 probably softened those trusses, which then failed and set off the building's collapse, the federal study concluded.
