Overview of Lesson Plan: Students will consider global warming and the greenhouse effect, and then explore how these issues are affecting countries with both growing and high energy usage. Then, students will graph their findings and write papers considering how continued usage can affect the future of the atmosphere and the global economy.
Objectives: Students will: 1. Define global warming and greenhouse effect, and consider how countries contribute to these environmental issues. 2. Consider the impact of China’s growth in fuel usage by reading and discussing the article “China’s Boom Adds to Global Warming Problem.” 3. In groups, research the demographic and economic effects of energy usage and then graph their results on posters. 4. Individually, write papers projecting how growth and usage in their assigned country will impact future world climate change.
Resources / Materials: -student journals -pens/pencils -classroom blackboard -copies of “China’s Boom Adds to Global Warming Problem” (one per student) -resources about particular countries’ gross domestic product, energy consumption, and fuel emissions (computers with Internet access, economics textbooks, etc.) -large sheets of construction paper or poster board (one per group) -markers (enough for students to share) -rulers (enough for students to share)
Activities / Procedures: 1. WARM-UP/DO NOW: In their journals, students should respond to the following prompt (written on the board prior to class): “Define global warming and the greenhouse effect. Then, explain how a country’s industries and energy usage can impact these phenomena. What country do you think is most to blame for global warming? Why?” After a few minutes, allow students time to share their answers. If necessary, be sure to review the definition of gross domestic product (GDP) prior to beginning the rest of the lesson. According to Merriam-Webster Dictionary, gross domestic product is “the gross national product excluding the value of net income earned abroad.” More information explaining the gross national product can be found at the Britannica.com Web site ( //www.britannica.com/eb/article?eu=38965&tocid=0&query=gross%20domestic%20product&ct=). Bottom of Form 2. As a class, read and discuss “China’s Boom Adds to Global Warming Problem,” focusing on the following questions: a. What problem is China’s rapid economic growth causing? b. What industry in China is booming? c. Why did energy experts and environmentalists hope China’s contribution to global warming would be limited? d. How do the effects of burning coal on global warming compare to the effects of natural gas and oil? e. Which country is the largest emitter of greenhouse gases? f. How do per capita emissions in China compare to the United States? g. What is the Kyoto Protocol? h. According to General Motors, what percentages of the world’s growth in new car sales will the United States, China and India hold, respectively? i. What problem has been found with China’s documentation of a decrease in coal usage? How did this occur? j. From where is China importing coal? k. What is the main use of coal in China? l. What other fuel is China purchasing in large amounts? m. For what item is China the world’s largest market? n. Why are environmentalists slow to criticize China’s role in the greenhouse effect? o. What other countries are consuming substantially more energy? p. If economic growth in China continues, what is the next big growth area in greenhouse emissions? Why? 3. Divide students into six groups. Explain that each group will research the demographics and economy of a particular country with either high fuel usage or growing fuel usage. They will then create posters with charts representing their research. Assign each group an industrialized country such as China, India, Brazil, Indonesia, United States, or Japan. Instruct students to research their country’s energy consumption, carbon dioxide emissions and gross domestic product (GDP) by looking at these Web sites (written on the board or copied onto a handout for easier student access): World Per Capita Primary Energy Consumption, 1980-2001 (//www.eia.doe.gov/pub/international/iealf/tablee1c.xls) World Per Capita Carbon Dioxide Emissions from the Consumption and Flaring of Fossil Fuels, 1980-2001 (//www.eia.doe.gov/pub/international/iealf/tableh1c.xls) World Per Capita Gross Domestic Product at Market Exchange Rates, 1980-2001 (//www.eia.doe.gov/pub/international/iealf/tableb2c.xls). Then, students should research their assigned country’s demographics and economy to help put the information found on the tables into perspective. How do the statistics on each table for your country compare to the World Total listed on each table? When research is complete, each group will create a poster illustrating their group’s findings. Besides a title including which country was researched, the poster should present the changes in consumption, emissions and GDP over time on a series of graphs. The graph(s) should be accompanied by visuals of the country’s demographics and economy. In a future class, posters may be presented as part of a discussion comparing and contrasting energy usage and its effects among the countries. 4. WRAP-UP/HOMEWORK: Individually, students will write a projection evaluating how their country’s consumption, emissions and economic growth will impact future global climate change. Students should be sure to include how their country’s statistics compare to the world total. Students should include the answers to the following questions in their projections: How might your country be able to reduce its threat to global warming in the future? Which industries will be most affected by the changes you are suggesting? What responsibility does your country have to the rest of the world?
Further Questions for Discussion: –Why is it difficult to keep track of coal mining and emissions? –How will emissions from China affect other parts of the world? –Why should the per capita percentage of fuel usage affect the type of emissions regulation a country receives? –Why is the use of electricity suddenly growing in China? –What nations have embraced the Kyoto Protocol? –What stances does the current White House administration have on global climate change? –What stances do the interested Democratic presidential candidates have on global climate change?
Evaluation / Assessment: Students will be evaluated based on initial journal responses, participation in class discussions, completion of group research and poster with graphs, and thoughtful completion of a projection paper.
Vocabulary: surge, emissions, efficient, capitalist, humanity, consumption, emitter, per capita, protocol, prospers, illuminating, freighter, adjacent, precaution, mandates, incentives, sectors, temper, dwarf, reluctance, demolish
Extension Activities: 1. Create a series of graphs illustrating future projections of energy consumption for the country you researched during class. Study the (2005-2025) Total Energy Consumption in Oil-Equivalent Units Projections tables from the International Energy Outlook, By Region with Selected Countries and World Total (Million (10^6) Tons Oil Equivalent): –Reference Case: //www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/ieo/pdf/appa9_a16.pdf –High Economic Growth Case: //www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/ieo/pdf/appb9_b15.pdf –Low Economic Growth Case: //www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/ieo/pdf/appc9_c15.pdf 2. Write a research paper examining the relationship between energy usage and population growth during the Industrial Revolution. 3. Research what percentage of the car industry’s revenues comes from alternative cars such as hybrids and electric. What percentage comes from gas-guzzling cars such as trucks and SUVs? Then create a presentation to a group of interested customers looking to purchase a new environmentally-sound car. 4. Create an annotated timeline of select inventions that have affected the world’s environment and economy. 5. Make a poster comparing different grades of coal, how they differ in composition, what they are used for, and how they differ in the amount of pollution they emit into the air.
Interdisciplinary Connections: Civics- Research the exemption provided to China and India in the Kyoto Protocol (//unfccc.int/resource/docs/convkp/kpeng.html). Write a position paper about whether you think this exemption should remain, or if it should change. Be sure to support your argument with facts about pollution rates and energy consumption in the different countries. One reference is the United States Energy Information Administration (//www.eia.doe.gov/). Be sure to look for global perspectives, in addition to that of the United States. Technology- Review the advancement of coal burning technology. How has equipment changed? What technology has been developed that reduces the amount of pollution emitted into the air by burning coal either in homes or in large power plants? Select one such technology and create a “How It Works” poster.
Other Information on the Web: National Environmental Trust (//environet.policy.net/) is an action network concerned with global warming, clean air, children’s environmental health, and the preservation of heritage forests. Energy Information Administration (//www.eia.doe.gov) from the U.S. Department of Energy includes data on oil and gas prices; an overview of imports and exports; and information on domestic exploration and production. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (//www.oecd.org) provides governments a setting in which to discuss and develop economic and social policy. The EPA Global Warming site (//www.epa.gov/globalwarming) provides news, a United States greenhouse gas inventory, reports and slides, and links to related Web sites.
This lesson plan may be used to address the academic standards listed above. These standards are drawn from Content Knowledge: A Compendium of Standards and Benchmarks for K-12 Education; 3rd and 4th Editions and have been provided courtesy of the Mid-continent Research for Education and Learning in Aurora, Colorado.
