Powered by robust international tobacco profits and better-than-expected performance of its Marlboro cigarette brand in the United States, the Philip Morris Companies announced strong fourth-quarter earnings yesterday, posting its 11th consecutive quarter of income growth in the double digits or better.
''Philip Morris is on a roll because they have something nobody else has -- Marlboro,'' said Emanuel Goldman, a securities analyst with Paine Webber. ''Very few companies can have a high-teens rate of operating income growth on a sustainable basis.''
''From a quality-of-earnings standpoint it was a very good quarter,'' said Roy D. Burry, a securities analyst with Oppenheimer & Company. The company's worldwide tobacco business posted a 15.2 percent increase in operating income, to $8.3 billion, and Philip Morris sold 891 billion cigarettes, a record, up 9.3 percent over 1995.
Although the company cautioned investors yesterday that a stronger dollar could weaken its international profits in 1997, Diana K. Temple, a securities analyst with Salomon Brothers Inc., said that ''Philip Morris is holding back reported profits'' by making aggressive expenditures on United States marketing.
Marlboro's hefty domestic market share is 49 percent, and for the first time the company produced more than 400 billion cigarettes in its United States facilities, said Martin Feldman, a tobacco analyst with Smith Barney.
The fourth-quarter operating income for the international tobacco business of Philip Morris was up 17.3 percent. The company's international tobacco growth ''defies gravity,'' Mr. Feldman said. In Eastern Europe, ''market share grew from 22 percent to 28 percent in 1996,'' he said.
In Africa, never thought of as a primary growth region for the company, Philip Morris had a surprising 1996 operating income of $100 million, Mr. Feldman said. ''And that's growing at 20 percent a year.''
As for the managers of the company's Kraft food business, they ''have the pulse of the marketplace better than they've had it in years,'' Mr. Goldman said. In the fourth quarter, operating income for the company's Kraft food business was up 8.8 percent in North America, and 12.3 percent internationally.
On the down side, ''there has been no fizz in Miller beer,'' Mr. Goldman said of the company's beer business. In the fourth quarter, Miller operating income was flat, and 1996 operating income declined 1.3 percent, to $440 million.
