To reach smokers in regions of the former Soviet Union where American cigarettes have not been available, the Philip Morris Companies announced yesterday that it would spend more than $200 million for a minority share of a manufacturing plant in Kazakhstan, the fourth most populous of the former Soviet republics and the third in which Philip Morris would operate a tobacco business.
The company said it would buy 49 percent of the state-owned Almaty Tobacco Kombinat, which employs 1,700 people, and would acquire additional shares within a year to gain majority ownership. The agreement represents one of the first major American investments in Kazakhstan, the second largest of the former Soviet republics after Russia. Kazakhstan has recently begun attempts to privatize state-owned industries.
Among all American tobacco companies, Philip Morris has maintained the most aggressive expansion strategies. While tobacco consumption in the United States has declined by more than 2 percent a year since the 1980's, foreign demand has steadily increased, especially for Marlboro, the world's best-selling brand, which is made by Philip Morris.
In 1990, Philip Morris's operating revenues from international tobacco surpassed revenues from domestic tobacco for the first time -- $10.7 billion to $10.4 billion -- and the difference has grown each year since. Further, the company's profits from international tobacco have increased at a higher rate than those from domestic. While domestic profits have grown by no more than 17 percent in any of the last four years, international profits have grown by at least 19 percent a year in the period. Continuing a Strategy
Michael Parsons, a spokesman for Philip Morris International, said the annual rate of cigarette consumption in the former Soviet republics is about 350 billion units, or 14.5 billion packs. In Kazakhstan, he said, the demand is about a billion packs a year.
The investment in Kazakhstan is intended to help the company flood the region with American-quality cigarettes, including Marlboro, and local brands -- the same strategy the company is using in Russia, where Philip Morris has an interest in 24 facilities, and in Lithuania.
In Kazakhstan, Philip Morris has embarked on a five-year plan to modernize Almaty and to reach annual production of 20 billion cigarettes. The output would be supplemented by Philip Morris exports from the United States and elsewhere, Mr. Parsons said.
