Trying to prod improvements from its languishing international food business, the Philip Morris Companies announced yesterday that it would cut 2,500 jobs in the division and close some factories in a makeover that will cost $630 million.
The move mirrors changes the company has made in recent years in its domestic food operations, selling or shrinking unprofitable businesses to focus on core operations. In the international division, concentrated in Europe, Philip Morris will make candy, coffee and cheese its primary interests, said a spokesman, Nicholas Rolli.
Last year, the international food division generated about 10 percent of Philip Morris's operating income before taxes. Tobacco, both international and domestic, accounts for about two-thirds of the $54 billion company's income. With United States tobacco companies facing greater legal restrictions, the company is intent on promoting growth in its other divisions.
The jobs to be cut are mostly in Europe as well, although a few positions at the company's offices in Rye Brook, N.Y., will be eliminated. The total represents about 8 percent of the international work force, Mr. Rolli said, and will not affect tobacco or beer operations.
The company will take a $630 million accounting charge against fourth-quarter earnings to reflect the cost of the cutback. But the resulting long-term savings are expected to total $200 million a year by 2000, and that money will be reinvested in the remaining products, Mr. Rolli said.
Analysts said they thought the reorganization had been a year in the making, beginning when John Bowlin, an architect of the domestic overhaul, took over as head of international foods in June 1996. ''Philip Morris has been very disappointed with the performance of its international food operations for the last several years,'' said Marc Cohen, a vice president at Goldman, Sachs & Company, who follows Philip Morris. ''It's clear to me that what they are doing is paring down the business to three growth platforms, and everything else is going to have to be highly profitable, growing or fit some strategic purpose, or it is going to be sold.''
Another analyst, John McMillin of Prudential Securities, said the international division should be growing faster because it is better positioned to be a market leader. ''But the bottom line is, the domestic has grown a lot faster than the international,'' he said. ''Now they are trying to follow the domestic blueprint of cutting costs and divesting their under-performing busineses.'' He added: ''It's not like Philip Morris to tolerate underperformance for long.''
Mr. Rolli said he could not give specifics on what units might be sold, or what jobs eliminated. The company's holdings overseas include Jacob Suchard, a candy and coffee manufacturer; Freia Marabou, also a candy company, and Gevalia, a coffee company from Sweden. Both were acquired within the last five years. The principal cheese product is Philadelphia brand cream cheese, a longtime Kraft Foods product. Kraft International and General Foods International, the other chief components of Philip Morris's overseas operations, were assembled through acquisitions in the early 1980's.
The $630 million fourth-quarter charge against earnings is expected to be mostly offset in the company's year-end accounting by a $770 million gain in the third quarter from the company's sale of Kibon, a big Brazilian ice cream company it shed as part of its focus on core businesses, Mr. Rolli said. Fourth-quarter earnings will be announced Jan. 28.
