The Philip Morris Companies confirmed yesterday that Hamish Maxwell, the chairman and chief executive for nearly seven years, plans to retire this year in accordance with board policy. Mr. Maxwell will be 65 years old in August.
A board meeting is scheduled for today, but a company spokeswoman declined to comment yesterday on a report in The Wall Street Journal that Philip Morris planned to announce Mr. Maxwell's retirement this week. The board could announce a successor or changes that would lead to the appointment of a successor.
Philip Morris, whose products include Marlboro cigarettes and Jell-O, is the world's largest maker of packaged goods. While no public plan of succession for Mr. Maxwell exists, the board has appeared to establish a competition between Michael A. Miles and William Murray, the chiefs of Philip Morris's food and tobacco businesses, respectively.
Last year, Mr. Miles, chairman of Kraft General Foods, was named a vice chairman of Philip Morris, joining Mr. Murray, head of worldwide tobacco operations, who had been named a vice chairman in 1987.
Mr. Maxwell changed Philip Morris from a company that sold tobacco and alcohol to one where most sales come from food. The gulf remains, however, in the earning power of the company's food products compared with tobacco -- a mere 10 cents of profit for every sales dollar for food, and more than 40 cents for tobacco.
Mr. Miles, an aggressive marketer, graduated from Northwestern University in 1961, with a bachelor's in advertising. He spent 10 years as an advertising executive, whose clients included Kentucky Fried Chicken. He became chairman of the chain, when Philip Morris's competitor, R. J. Reynolds Industries, bought it along with Heublein Inc. He joined Kraft Inc. as president and chief operating officer in 1982 and came to Philip Morris in 1989 when it acquired Kraft.
Mr. Murray is a strong contender as well, having presided over Marlboro's continuing dominance of the American market as well as the expansion of the brand overseas, where it has surpassed RJR Nabisco Inc.'s top brands.
As reticent as Mr. Maxwell, a Scotsman born in Liverpool, England, Mr. Murray has an international background. Born in Australia, he is a chartered accountant who worked with the United Nations Relief Works Agency in Beirut, Lebanon, and the International Labor Organization in Geneva.
He joined Philip Morris in 1970 as a finance manager in Switzerland. He rose rapidly on the financial side of Philip Morris's relatively small foreign operations in the 1970's, becoming president of Philip Morris International in 1983.
