Forrester polled 565 corporations in North America and Europe during the third quarter and found that Dell will “easily retain its position as the preferred desktop and laptop supplier to enterprises, despite the competitive pressure that HP and Lenovo exert.”
Indeed, 48 percent of the companies surveyed said Dell would be their primary supplier of desktops in the future, and 50 percent said Dell would be their main supplier of laptops. Next came Hewlett-Packard, followed by Lenovo.
The corporate business in America is the core franchise for Dell, and it seemed vulnerable after widespread reports of customer complaints for long waits to get support calls answered and indifferent service. The Forrester report suggests that Michael Dell, who took over as chief executive early this year, is putting the company he founded back on track.
The report, “How Enterprise Buyers Rate Their PC Suppliers and What It Means for Future Purchases,” also addressed other issues, including the corporate adoption of Microsoft’s Windows Vista operating system.
Corporations, Mr. Gray said, have been slow to upgrade to Vista so far, and that will not likely change until mid-2008. Beyond the usual hassle of tweaking many software applications for a new operating system, there is a big hardware hurdle, especially memory. Standard machines from PC makers now have 1 gigabyte of memory, and corporate technology managers are waiting until 2 gigabytes becomes the standard next year. Vista is a heavyweight operating system, and thus a memory hog.
Corporate buyers, Mr. Gray said, are also waiting until Microsoft releases its first Service Pack for Vista, a collection of software improvements and fixes. That code, called SP-1, is scheduled to come out in the first quarter of 2008. Microsoft had insisted that Vista was tested and debugged more thoroughly than any previous version of Windows.
Dell has very professional in terms of satisfying her customers as i have the personal experience of the thing and being a dell employee i have seen people working for customer like anything and DELL ROCKS.
William, what in the WORLD does grousing about Vista (an eminently grouse-able product, I agree) have to do with an article about Dell’s customer satisfaction? Whether Vista is good or bad is beside the point; that Dell’s satisfaction numbers are improving IS the point.
Permit me to be a naysayer, but I was a Dell champion before Dell was Dell – back when it was PCs Limited and Michael was selling parts out of his parent’s garage. I created an all-Dell house for a Wall Street firm and spent over a $1,000,000 on Dell and the computers were reliable and the tech support created an enviable standard. Then things changed in the early 2000s. My personal experience with Dell has so enraged me, I will never buy another Dell – the boxes are fine, the problem still remains with tech support and customer service despite questionable marketing studies. Sorry, Michael – you are too late and now that I’ve retired and have to deal with your consumer division, I don’t care to put myself through the hell that is your tech/cs support in the far east. Nice to have known you, back when it was nice to know you.
I am a Dell employee in field sales. Each day I see nothing but folks helping me help my customers with their business. The spirit is positive on the inside and charged up. Coming from another Fortune 500 two years ago to Dell was an eye opening experience on how to manage your business on the inside and still satisfy your customers expectations on the outside. From my point of view, Dell is doing many things today to make up for things that may have happened prior to my time here. Michael is making a big difference again. It’s his name on the board but it his employees who believe in the Spirit of Dell that are going to make it all work again for the customers.
I am an on-site technician for Dell and although they make mistakes you have to consider how many PCs and Laptops of theirs’ are out there. Only a small few ever actually break. If people weren’t completely computer illiterate the software wouldn’t be giving them headaches all the time. GET VIRUS PROTECTION!…it’s free. That is simply the biggest problem I have, people call in and demand service and what they don’t realize is that DELL and its Techs are not computer tutors. Learn how to use the system and don’t blame the makers of such wonderful products for your incompetence.
