Caremark Rx, facing mounting opposition to its proposed $23.7 billion acquisition by pharmacy chain CVS, said Tuesday it would triple the special dividend payable to its shareholders after the deal closes. Caremark, a manager of prescription-drug benefits, said it raised the dividend to $6 per Caremark share, up from the previously announced $2 per share. On Monday, two more investment advisory firms urged Caremark shareholders to reject the CVS merger at a vote scheduled for Feb. 20.
The advisory firms, CtW Investment Group and Institutional Shareholder Services, joined two other advisers who said Caremark’s board and managers had not tried to get the best deal for shareholders. CtW held a forum on Feb. 2 where institutional shareholders holding about 46 percent of Caremark’s stock heard from the chief executives of both CVS and Express Scripts, which has made a rival bid for Caremark.
“Given the inadequate value and uncertain benefits of the CVS merger as proposed and the Caremark board’s stunning failure to engage in a negotiating process that would maximize shareholder value, we urge you to vote the company’s white proxy card against Proposal No. 1 to approve the CVS merger,” CtW’s letter to shareholders said.
CtW works with public and union-sponsored pension funds representing an estimated 18.7 million Caremark shares. Glass, Lewis & Company and Egan-Jones, two other investor advisory firms, have already advised shareholders to vote against the CVS offer.
“After thorough analysis, we believe this transaction, which is scheduled to close this month, will create substantial immediate and long-term value for Caremark shareholders relative to other strategic options, including the highly conditional, hostile Express Scripts offer,” Caremark chairman and chief executive Mac Crawford said in a press release.
This Knowledge Maps shows how synergistic the merger between Caremark and CVS will be. (Internet Explorers required) //fn.intellectspace.com/iSpaceInternal/GuestMonitor.aspx?id=858cd954-1412-4b19-aac0-1cceb99053f4
