NOW that the big pharmacy chains seem to have built facing drugstores at every intersection in America, the competition to sell aspirin, shampoo and antibiotics is moving onto the Internet just as aggressively.
The idea has a lot going for it. From a practical standpoint, drugstore products are easy to ship. A pile of toiletries fits neatly in a relatively small package. And even the fruitiest of shampoos are nonperishable.
More important to customers, on-line pharmacies can make it easier than ever to refill a prescription or shop around for the best deal in over-the-counter remedies. At some sites, detailed information about individual prescriptions and thousands of health care products is only a click or two away.
The potential for persuading on-line customers to add a host of other, more profitable items to their prescription orders is so great that the market has grown crowded since the beginning of the year. Drugstore.com grabbed the media spotlight early as a result of its 40 percent backing by the on-line bookseller Amazon.com About the same time, Planetrx.com and Soma.com opened, sending the chain drugstores scrambling to bring their Web sites up to speed.
But to get from here to there, retailers have discovered they need the blessing of the pharmacy benefit managers, the companies that manage prescription benefits for health insurance plans. That blessing is slow in coming.
Pharmacy benefit managers arrange networks of pharmacies to fill prescriptions for the plans they manage and then reimburse the stores for prescription costs. Patients are more likely to shop at network pharmacies, where they can be sure their co-payments will be honored. So it behooves all pharmacies, on line and otherwise, to maintain contracts with benefit managers.
On-line pharmacies are not being warmly received in these networks because of a turf war over mail-order prescriptions. The largest pharmacy benefit managers, Merck-Medico Managed Care, Express Scripts and PCS Health Systems, have long held exclusive contracts with their clients for 90-day mail-order business. Reluctant to give ground to new competitors, some are aggressively moving ahead with their own on-line pharmacies.
If the fierce battle between Amazon.com and Barnesandnoble.com over the comparatively paltry $15 billion book market is any indicator of what is ahead, the on-line drugstore wars should be fierce. The pharmacy benefit managers' influence has already reshaped an industry that began early this year as a few high-profile on-line pharmacy upstarts and is now a complex array of independent ventures and strategic partnerships.
The territory is huge. According to the National Association of Chain Drugstores, the retail drugstore industry is a $153.6 billion market. Chains account for about 60 percent of prescription drug sales, which total about $103 billion and are growing by about 10 percent a year, leading the president of Drugstore.com, Peter Neupert, to observe gleefully, ''That's $10 billion in revenue just in new prescriptions every year.''
Drugstore.com and Soma.com figured out quickly that they would need powerful allies to gain access to that revenue. One week, Mr. Neupert was boasting of the superiority of his on-line store to real drugstores, and the next he was announcing a partnership with the Rite Aid chain.
That deal gave Drugstore.com access to the 50 million customers served by PCS of Scottsdale, Ariz., the second-largest pharmacy benefit manager and a subsidiary of the Rite Aid Corporation, based in Camp Hill, Pa. Though Drugstore.com will remain an independent pharmacy, Rite Aid and PCS will have access to its site to make Internet sales.
Just before that deal was announced in June, the CVS Corporation said that it was acquiring Soma.com for $30 million. As the country's largest drugstore chain, CVS, based in Woonsocket, R.I., has 55 million prescription customers and about 9,000 insurance providers.
''We see the Internet as a logical, natural extension of our focus on convenience and value,'' said Larry Zigerelli, the executive vice president for corporate development at CVS. ''Our Internet customers may choose to have their prescriptions mailed, or in the case of acute prescriptions, to pick them up in-store.''
While Mr. Zigerelli said that most pharmacy benefit managers had already worked out a mail option with CVS, some of the largest are holding out, choosing instead to carve out their own presence on line. Just last month, Express Scripts announced that it was transferring its fledgling E-commerce subsidiary, Yourpharmacy.com, to Planetrx Inc., which will become the exclusive on-line pharmacy for Express Scripts' 36 million members. In return, Planetrx will pay the company more than $11 million a year in fees.
Express Scripts will continue to handle 90-day mail-order prescriptions, about 10 percent of its business, said Barrett Toan, the company's president and chief executive. But Planetrx will fill 30-day mail-order prescriptions for Express Scripts customers and try to sell them health and beauty products at the same time.
Express Scripts customers who shop at other on-line pharmacies will have to pay full price if they want their prescriptions shipped. However, co-payments will be honored when they order prescriptions at a chain drugstore Web site, like CVS.com, and pick them up at a store. That retail store business, after all, is the lifeblood of the pharmacy benefit managers.
T he chains agree with that perspective but carry it one step further, arguing that their contracts with benefit managers extend to their on-line operations regardless of whether the prescriptions they fill are picked up at the store or shipped. ''The 90-day mail-order prescription -- that is business the P.B.M.'s have today and that will remain,'' Mr. Zigerelli said. ''The 30-day, 60-day, or sometimes even 20-day prescription -- that is business that we fill. We fully expect that all of our on-line customers will be able to receive their prescriptions by mail if they choose.''
No one is sure how this will play out. But David Restrepo, a health analyst at Jupiter Communications in New York, speculated that the pharmacy-benefit managers would have to reach a compromise. Such an awareness is hinted at in the contract between Drugstore.com and PCS, he noted. While Drugstore.com will be the exclusive on-line vehicle for mail-order prescriptions for PCS, the contract leaves the way open for PCS to fill 30-day prescriptions for retailers who set up shop on the Internet.
As for whether on-line pharmacies will supplant the corner drugstore, the National Association of Chain Drugstores is reserving comment. ''There's no good way to determine their impact yet,'' said Phillip Schneider, the director of public affairs for the association.
But Mr. Zigerelli does not expect much pain at CVS. He expects on-line pharmacy sales to account for no more than 10 percent of the industry's revenue over the next decade. And he said he expected the Internet to open new territory for CVS stores west of the Mississippi.
Though many people will begin to buy their prescriptions and toiletries without going near their neighborhood pharmacy, partnerships between on-line and retail stores will continue to be crucial for reasons that have nothing to do with co-payments. No matter how many choices they have on line, some customers still will want to talk to a pharmacist in person.
''The level of personal interaction is a lot more important in this category than in, say, books and CD's,'' said Erik Brynjolfsson, the co-director of the program on electronic commerce and marketing at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. ''The on-line approach can bring in some cost-effectiveness, but what they lack is face-to-face human interaction.''
