NEVER mind France. Local art lovers can follow the Impressionist trail in Connecticut to discover where American artists of that school lived, gathered inspiration and painted, and where their works are displayed.
The idea behind the art trail, pulling together 11 museums and other sites, which is partly financed by the Connecticut Department of Economic Development, is to rekindle interest in American artistic roots, in particular the Impressionists who spent much time in the state.
Gov. John G. Rowland officially opened the art trail in June by unveiling its poster and brochure at the Hartford Steam Boiler Inspection and Insurance Company, the only corporate headquarters in the consortium.
This country's first artist colonies were established along the New England shore, most notably in Cos Cob and Old Lyme. But for "the compelling natural appeal" of the coastline, the state's proximity to New York City and the coming of the railroad, "the art movement in Connecticut could not have happened," said Tony Thurston, Florence Griswold Museum trustee and project leader for the trail.
In the last years of the 19th century and early years of the 20th, hundreds of paintings of the Connecticut landscape were produced by artists including J. Alden Weir, John Twachtman, Childe Hassam and Willard Metcalf. They were part of a group that split off from the Society of American Artists in 1897.
Two of these -- the Bush-Holley House, home of the Cos Cob artist colony, and the Florence Griswold Museum, the center of the Lyme colony -- are National Historic Landmarks. The third, Weir Farm in Wilton, the summer home of J. Alden Weir, is Connecticut's only national park and the only park in the nation devoted to a painter.
These three sites invite visitors to step into the past -- into the homes where the artists lived, the studios where they worked and the actual landscapes that inspired them. The emphasis is on seeing the countryside so as to better understand the artists and the paintings themselves.
They might, for example, start at the recently expanded and renovated Bruce Museum in Greenwich, which has works by Impressionist artists who painted in Cos Cob, a part of Greenwich. The museum's most recent acquisition, "The Mill Pond, Cos Cob" (1902), by Childe Hassam, depicts the pond with moored boats, and locomotives chugging high above, on the Miamus River railroad bridge.
Hassam, who painted from 1894 to 1917 with Weir and Twachtman at Holley's boarding house (now known as the Bush-Holley House), dubbed the community the "Cos Cob Clapboard School" because the group so often depicted the area's architecture. The Bush-Holley House, a 1732 saltbox that is now home to the Historical Society of the Town of Greenwich. The house, which is immortalized in paintings by Theodore Robinson, Elmer Livingston MacRae and others, as well as Twachtman and Hassam, is decorated with 18th-century furniture and accessories.
A half-hour drive up Route 7 in Wilton is the 57-acre Weir Farm National Historic Site, which offers an orientation center, changing exhibitions, a formal tour of Weir's studio and the opportunity to explore the little-changed vistas he and the artists who visited him painted.
Yale University Art Gallery in New Haven traces the beginnings of the Impressionist movement with paintings by Monet, Renoir, Pissarro, Degas and Sisley before moving into works by American Impressionist artists.
The Florence Griswold Museum in Lyme sits on six landscaped acres with gardens and a recently restored artist's studio. The colony's founder, Henry Ward Ranger, described Old Lyme as a setting "only waiting to be painted." In addition to period settings and still-intact landscapes painted by resident artists on the doors and panels of the former dining room, the museum offers exhibitions exploring the region's art and history, with emphasis on the contribution of the Lyme art colony to American art.
Still others in the consortium are the Lyman Allyn Art Museum in New London, the William Benton Museum of Art at the University of Connecticut in Storrs plus the and the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford as well as the New Britain Museum of American Art and the Hill-Stead Museum in Farmington.
