NEWARK. THE headline‐making trial begins. U. S. Attorney Frederick B. Lacey—a commanding 6 feet 4 and 225 pounds, a man who walks at a trot—rises and asks Judge Robert Shaw: “Your Honor, may I use the lectern? I have so many notes.” The judge nods and Lacey wheels the lectern to a spot front and center, before the jury box.
The jurors are brought in. They settle themselves with the usual self conscious bustle and look up at Lacey and the judge, the sober citi zens composing themselves with an air of appropriate seriousness as they prepare to listen to a fantastic story of gangland intrigue and brutality.
The Federal prosecutor goes into his opening address, and it quickly becomes apparent that the business with the lectern was just a bit of expert stage ‐ managing. Frederick Lacey does not need such a prop for his notes; his case is in his head. He speaks in a deep, resonant voice, clearly and distinctly, leaning casual ly across the lectern toward the jury. When he reaches an especially dra matic point, he rests his right elbow on a corner of the lectern, his lower arm and pointed finger stabbing at the jury. He captures and holds all eyes.
The tale that he unfolds is one that, varying only in details, is to be repeated again and again in the Fed eral Courthouse in Newark during the next two years. In a series of trials just beginning, jury after jury will be asked to decide cases which, in their cumulative effect, are ex pected to provide the most graphic study in American criminal annals of the complete subversion of a city —and, indeed, of much of a state— by the money and muscle of the underworld.
The case Lacey outlines to the Newark jury on this particular day deals with the international financial machinations of a shady Newark insurance broker, Louis Saperstein, who departed this world in late November, 1968, mysteriously loaded with “enough arsenic to kill a mule.” It is a tale that involves literally hundreds of thousands of dollars in an international stock scheme. The money for this gambit in high finance —all cash—had been obtained, Lacey says, from Angelo DeCarlo, variously known as “Ray” and “the Gyp,” who is identified as a capo in the Jersey Mafia family formerly headed by the late Vito Genovese. DeCarlo's favor ite racket over the years has been loansharking, and he and three asso ciates are on trial for having tried to collect thousands of dollars week in “vigorish” Ithe loan shark's term for usurious interest) from Saperstein, allegedly beating him in the process “until his face turned purple and his tongue bulged out.”
As Lacey speaks, there reposes in the courtroom behind the prosecu tion table what can only be described as a time bomb. It is an aluminum file cart, much like the kind used in supermarkets, and it is piled high with some 1,200 pages of white printed transcripts, the product of four years of industrious Federal Bureau of Investigation wiretapping and bugging of the phone and prem ises of Angelo DeCarlo. The tran scripts are records of conversations in which DeCarlo and his associates brag about having a stranglehold on the city of Newark and much of New Jersey. Before the day is out, Judge Shaw will make the transcript public.
Throughout the drama of Lacey's speech, Angelo DeCarlo sits impas sively, to all appearances the most unflappable man in the courtroom. He resembles nothing so much as a simple Italian paisano‐67 years old, silver‐haired, short and stocky, with an impressive paunch. He is wearing a shapeless gray suit with a light brown sweater under the coat to guard against the winter's chill. He has a heavy face a long, sharp nose and a shelving chin; and when he waddles out into the corridor among his waiting henchmen, his lips curve around a big cigar in an almost cherubic smile. But there is nothing cherubic about him now. He swivels around in his chair at the defense table, turning his back on Lacey with a kind of bored indifference, his tight lips twisted in a hard trav esty of a smile while the cold remote eyes, devoid of any trace of humor, stare out at the courtroom spectators with never a blink.
SUCH is the scenario. It is one that will be repeated almost endlessly in the coming months as U. S. Attor ney Lacey and his young assistants wade through a mushrooming pile of indictments that, on their face, out line the most complete network of crime and official corruption that has yet to be brought to trial in an American courtroom. There has been nothing remotely comparable to this since the Murder, Inc., trials of 1940; and by comparison even Murder, Inc., was pallid stuff.
The late William O'Dwyer, who rode to glory on that exposé, ‐con tented himself with sending to the electric chair the expendable strong arms of gangdom; he never touched their bosses, Joe Adonis and the late Albert Anastasia. Nor did he disturb the political superstructure without whose complaisance the organized underworld could not exist. In this perspective, the current Jersey in vestigation harbors a far more explo sive potential.
The potential began building almost half a century ago from that time to this, to put it bluntly, Newark has been dominated by the mob—and it is a remarkable and notable fact of life in Newark that no underworld mogul of the first rank has ever suf fered much more than a gentle slap on the wrist from the forces of the law. When a big‐time mobster gets in deep trouble, something almost invariably happens.
THE story goes back to Prohibition days, to the nineteen‐twenties. New ark, New Jersey's largest city and only a short truck haul from the thirsting fleshpots of Manhattan, be came virtually the bootleg capital of the Eastern seaboard. In the gangland wars of the era, a czar of czars emerged. He was Abner (Longie) Zwillman, a Newark Jew who came to rule one of the toughest mobs in gangland history. Zwillman's under world rivals seemed to meet their Maker in the most gory fashion, but the mob ruler himself was always leagues removed from the awful deed.
His free use of muscle and a native organizational genius made Zwillman the most important bootlegger on the East Coast. In Pdrt Newark, then far more isolated from the central city than it is, today, his rum‐running fleets operated on almost a regular ferry schedule; and all up and down the inlet ‐ dented New Jersey shoreline, especially in Monmouth and Ocean Counties, Longie's men ran a gantlet of unseeing Coast Guardsmen until they could reach haven in the arms of local policemen and sheriffs. The magnitude of the Zwillman operation may be gleaned from official estimates that his mob reaped a $50‐million bonanza from bootlegging between 1926 and 1931, and that at the peak of its operation it was importing about 40 per cent of the bootleg liquor flowing across the nation's borders.
Such rapidly accumulated millions catapulted Zwillman into a position of enormous (and not too secret) political power. He became known as the Democratic boss of Newark's old Third Ward and his money helped to finance many a state gubernatorial campaign. The scuttlebutt of the times was that Longie Zwillman requested just one little favor from gubernatori al candidates who benefited from his largesse — the right to name, or at least to approve, the new Attorney General. There was never any proof of such a deal, but events frequently lent credence to the rumors. Mobsters were rarely inconvenienced in New Jersey, and the state became increas ingly a haven for gangsters.
The path of an underworld chief tain is never smooth, however, and so it was with Longie. As he rose in power, so did a rival, Ruggiero (Richie the Boot) Boiardo. Just as Zwillman became the political power of the Third Ward, Boiardo achieved domi nance in the First. And there was no love lost between them.
They were oddly contrasting types. Boiardo was the flashy Prohibition mobster, complete with a $5,000 dia mond‐studded belt buckle. Zwillman was the suave businessman of crime, a strangely dual personality. He had married into society; he knew how to conduct himself like a gentleman, and his heart bled all over his public sleeve for the poor. In the blackest pit of the Depression, he reached into his bootleg millions and paid the cost of running a soup kitchen for the im poverished in Newark's Military Park. He later established a similar soup kitchen at a Catholic church. There was, however, nothing benevolent about him when the issue was a test of underworld power; and this fact Richie the Boot Boiardo was to learn at great expense.
THE bloodletting was preceded, as is so often the case in the treacherous quicksands of the underworld, by great show of fraternity. Longie and Richie the Boot announced in 1930 that they had composed their differ ences, and just to show how much they loved each other, they threw bash that was to become the talk of Newark. The party roared into its second sunset and terminated then only because The Newark News had begun to show some interest in the merriment. It spoke much about the political climate in Newark that gangsters and politicians mingled in discriminately; among the politicians present were a former U.S. Commis sioner, a candidate for the State Assembly and—most unfortunately— Paul Moore, a Democrat who was running for Congress. Moore commit ted the indiscretion of having his pic ture taken with the Boot and his belt buckle. Moore's rival, the late Repre sentative Fred Hartley, had thousands of copies of the picture distributed in the Eighth Congressional District, and Moore later lamented that the photo graph had played a large role in his defeat.
If Richie the Boot thought that the two‐day wassail had made Longie Zwillman his bosom pal, he was soon to be disabused of the notion. Shortly after the party the Boot stepped out into the daylight at 242 Broad Street and encountered a hail of bullets sprayed from a sniper's nest across the street. Sixteen slugs perforated Boiardo's anatomy, and his life was probably saved by his $5,000 diamond belt buckle. “The shot that almost certainly would have killed him, rip ping through his intestines, hit that belt buckle and ricocheted away,” says a man who remembers the incident.
When Richie recovered, he was sent to prison for 2½ years because he had been car rying a gun himself when he was put upon on Broad Street. But prison was not the tough ordeal for the Boot that it is for most. He was packed off to Trenton State Prison in March, 1931. However though regulations provided that prisoners must serve at least one‐third of their sen tences before they could be considered for less rigorous confinement—Richie the Boot was whisked away to the minimum ‐ security Borden town Prison Farm after only four months. And rumors soon began circulating that wit nesses had seen the Boot, as big as life, circulating in his old Newark haunts, especially at night and on weekends. The police investigated—but, of course, found no proof.
Just how ineffectual the law was during this period was illustrated in 1939, when Richie got into difficulties with the State Alcoholic Bev erage Control office. The A.B.C. seemed to have the irrational notion that the Boot, as a convicted gangster, had no business operating a tavern called the Vittoria Castle. In the subsequent hearings, some high police of ficials testified to Boiardo's estimable character. Acting Capt. Joseph Cocozza of the Essex County Prosecutor's staff testified, that he and his wife often dined with the Boot and the latter's wife, and he added: “We have never con nected him with any gang in our work.” The deputy police chief in Newark and the sergeant in charge of the morals squad added their voices to the chorus, testify ing that Richie was simply “trying to earn an honest living.”
Reality, of course, bore no resemblance to these official pronouncements. Last sum mer the Government released transcripts produced in four years of surveillance of Simone Rizzo (Sam the Plumb er) DeCavalcante, who, says the F.B.I., is a Mafioso of the first water. In the DeCaval cante tapes, the real story of Richie the Boot, still active at 80, began to emerge. The reve lation came when of the boys got together in Sam's of fice to talk over the finer points of murder. Participants in the conversation, according to the F.B.I., were Sam the Plumber, Ray the Gyp DeCarlo and Anthony (Tony Boy) Boiardo, Richie's son and heir. It went like this:
TONY BOY: The Boot hit him with a hammer. The guy goes down and comes up. So I got a crowbar this big, Ray. Eight shots in the head. What do you think he finally did to me? He spit at me and said, “You —.”
THE tapes released at De Carlo's trial Jan. 6 add another startling dimension to the picture. Richie the Boot's private citadel is a great stone mansion (built in part with slabs his wrecking company crews had torn from the old Newark Post Office when it was demolished) that sits upon a wooded plot of several acres in Livingston, N. J. The mansion is ap proached by a drive at least two city blocks long, and at one turn the startled visitor comes upon a monument to megalomania. There, life‐size and in full color on a life size white horse, sits a stone Richie in all his splendor, while around and below him, mounted on stone pedestals, are some nine busts—also in full, glorious color—of mem bers of his family. The Boiardo castle, isolated behind a thick screen of trees at the end of the drive, is an errie place; and, according to the F.B.I.'s transcripts, some shudderingly sinister things have happened there.
On Jan. 7, 1963, according to the F.B.I. tapes, DeCarlo and Anthony (Little Pussy) Russo—a mobster who once bragged that he had Long Branch in his hip pocket— discussed some of the maca bre events that had taken place on the Boiardo estate: Russo warned DeCarlo never to go near the place alone if Boiardo tried to lure him there. According to Russo and DeCarlo, there was an incin erator for human bodies at the rear of the estate, up be hind the Boiardo greenhouse. “... Ray, I seen too many,” said Little Pussy. “You know how many guys we hit that there?”
Little Pussy and Ray the Gyp agreed that Richie the Boot was “a nut” because he disposed of not only the bodies that resulted from his own business endeavors, but also those that any other mob chief chose to pass on. According to Russo, the late Thomas (Three‐Finger Brown) Luch ese, for years the ruler of one of New York's five Mafia families, used to turn over the bodies of his victims to Boiardo for burning. “... He'd give them to me and we'd take them up,” Russo DeCarlo.
The picture that emerges from the transcripts contra dicts the blard contentions of Newark policemen that Richie the Boot was an estimable character trying to earn an honest living. Of course, back in 1939 the police did not have F.B.I. tapes to apprise them of the facts of life, but still there were events that seemed to speak for them selves. In the election of November, 1932, for example, the 11th District of Longie Zwillman's Third Ward gave all the Republican candidates except Herbert Hoover just eight votes; Hoover got nine. And the Democrats, almost to registered 587.
The suspiciously stuffed ballot boxes were impounded but somehow managed to flit past bemused guards and out of the City Hall basement as if they had been carried on a witch's broomstick. Few peo ple in Newark had any doubt that the witch who had per formed this magical deed was Longie Zwillman, and there was a terrific hullabaloo that included a number of indict ments. Then, of course, noth ing happened. Nobody was convicted.
This “no conviction” refrain became familiar in Newark as scandal after scandal whim pered to a silent and forgotten end. More than 20 indictments have been returned against public officials over the years; officials have been criticized and censured; business firms and contractors doing busi ness with the city have been indicted. But seldom has any one had the misfortune to be convicted.
Perhaps it is just a coinci dence, but during these dec ades when the law and the courts seemed unable to fight their way out of a paper bag, the buddy‐buddy relationship of the underworld with New ark's politicians remained one of the world's worst ‐ kept secrets. The love affair proba bly never received greater public exposure than at the wedding of Tony Boy Boiardo in 1950. More than 2,000 guests turned out, and among them were Mayor Ralph Vil lani, now president of the City Council; Hugh J. Addonizio, then a Congressman, now the indicted Mayor of Newark, and Rep. Peter W. Rodino, still a Democratic Congress man from the 10th District.
SUCH is the background of Newark. After decades of scandals, after the sputtering of innumerable exposés that have fizzled like pieces of punk in a cloudburst, Newark has once more been propelled into the spotlight as a graphic study in mob rule and politi cal corruption.
The reasons go back to the Newark riot of 1967. On July 12 of ‐ that year the predomi nantly Negro Central Ward exploded in one of the worst race riots in the nation's history. The outburst lasted for days, left 26 persons dead and inflicted property damage estimated at $10.4 ‐ million. Even today, large sections of the Central Ward stand in blackened, boarded‐up ruins, resembling nothing so much as the gaping chasms left in a city destroyed by war.
In an effort to determine the causes of the Newark out break, Gov. Richard J. Hughes appointed a commission headed by Robert D. Lilley, executive vice president of American Telephone and Tele graph. The Lilley commission's report in February, 1968, was a shocker. It found that an important underlying cause of the 1967 riot was “a perva sive feeling of corruption” in Newark, and declared: “A former state official, a former city official and an incumbent city official all used the same phrase: There is a price on everything at City Hall.”
Though the commission did not go into specifics, its blast at Newark touched off wide spread reaction. Essex County Prosecutor Joseph P. Lordi began an 18‐month grand jury investigation, and state legis lative hearings were held. Prof. Henry S. Ruth, who had been deputy staff director of the President's Commission on Law Enforcement and the Administration of Justice, touched sensitive political nerves when he declared that, in his opinion, “Official cor ruption in New Jersey is so bad that organized crime can get almost anything it de sires.” Another expert witness assured flabbergasted officials that Professor Ruth was ab solutely right. And, capping all, William J. Brennan 3d (the son of the Supreme Court Justice) remarked in a speech in December, 1968, that number of legislators were entirely “too comfortable” with organized crime.
Brennan's remark almost prostrated the New Jersey Legislature, but events were to vindicate the young pros ecutor. The Nixon Adminis tration came to office on the cry of law and order and a pledge to fight crime. A new U. S. Attorney for New Jersey was to be appointed, and Senator Clifford Case, for years the best Republican vote‐getter in the state, rec ommended Frederick Lacey.
AT 48, Lacey was a part ner in the law firm of Shan ley and Fisher. His roots go deep in Newark. His grand father was at one time a Re publican Freeholder in Essex County; his father was New ark police chief for eight years; his mother still lives in the Vailsburg section of New ark, where he was born and went to school. A Phi Beta Kappa graduate of Rutgers University and a graduate of the Cornell Law School (where he was editor of the Law Review), a lieutenant com mander in the Navy, a former city councilman in Glen Ridge, Lacey had moved at a furious pace to the top of his profes sion and was considered an expert on cases involving aerial and medical law. He specialized in trial work was generally considered brilliant at it and represented some of the largest corporations in the nation in especially diffi cult cases.
When the bid came from Washington, he went down to the capital to discuss the pro position with Attorney Gen eral John N. Mitchell. “I was making big money, really big money at the time,” he says, and he didn't see how he could take the $29,000‐a year U. S. Attorney's post. He was about to reject the offer when he received a call from William Sutherland, a 73‐year‐ old lawyer.
“When you're my age,” Lacey says Sutherland told him, “and you look back on your life, your pride will not be the size of the estate you are going to leave, but what you have accomplished know that you have an ex tremely lucrative law practice, but when you get to this point the money you didn't make won't seem to matter so much. What you might have accomplished in a few years as U. S. Attorney could well be the one thing in your life would be proud of.”
There was another consid eration. Lacey, as a young lawyer, had had one direct and shocking confrontation with big‐league New Jersey crime. Throughout the nine‐ teen‐forties and into the fifties —until the Kefauver investi gation threw a wrench into the machinery — the Mafia families of New York and New Jersey had run a verita ble capital of crime in nuke's Restaurant, opposite the Pali sade Amusement Park. Here working crime council held daily conclave. It consisted of Joe Adonis, Frank Cos tello's partner, as chairman of the board; Albert Anas tasia, the enforcer; the Moretti brothers, Willie and Solly, and Anthony (Tony Bender) Strol lo, the right arm of Vito Geno vese. On Tuesdays, the council met with some of the top czars of the national syndi cate. Longie Zwillman might come up from Newark; Frank Costello from New York; Meyer Lansky from Florida. When Zwillman wasn't pres ent, his proxy was voted by Gerardo (Jerry) Catena. After Zwillman committed suicide in 1959, Catena rose in power and is now reputed to be the ruler of the Jersey wing of the Genovese family. New York detectives, Internal Revenue agents and Federal Bureau of Narcotics agents were aware of the pivotal importance of Duke's Restau rant, but when they tried to go over to New Jersey for a little sleuthing, they were often chased out of town by local policemen.
When the lid finally blew off, under the threat of a Fed eral investigation, it caused a scandal that rocked the New Jersey State House. The charge was that the Adonis‐Moretti combine had paid Harold John Adonis, a clerk in Gov. Alfred E. Driscoll's office and no relation to gangdom's Joe, $228,000 over a period of 19 months for protection at the state level. Frederick Lacey, a young assistant U. S. Attor ney, inherited the chore of prosecuting both Harold Adonis and Albert Anastasia, and he got convictions against both.
“In that case,” Lacey says now, “I found conditions shocking—and I hadn't con sidered myself at all naive. But I had never encountered the broad evidence of corrup tion of public bodies, business and labor unions. It became my fixed and firm conviction that organized crime was tak ing us over. And everything that I have seen so far in this office reinforces that conviC tion.”
WHEN he decided to ac cept the U.S. Attorney's post, Lacey says, he had a firm understanding with Attorney General Mitchell. First, he explains, there is one theory that a U. S. Attorney should simply prosecute the cases handed to him by Federal investigative agencies; Lacey thinks a U. S. Attorney should be aggressive and actively develop cases if the situation seems to warrant it. The At torney General agreed. “Next,” Lacey continues, “I was as sured I would have a free hand in selecting staff and in the direction we would go. Wherever our leads take us, that's where we will go.”
Lacey believes that the public, so long apathetic about syndicated crime, must be shocked and aroused, must be made to understand that when it places a $2 bet with a bookie or plays the numbers it is feeding the treasury of the underworld — and paying for the corruption of its own officials. In a speech to a bar association gathering at Seton Hall University in South Orange on Nov. 29, some three weeks before his investi gation exploded in a rash of indictments, Lacey told his audience: “I want to challenge you—indeed, to goad you— to accept obligations, to as sume responsibilities... unless you, as leaders, arouse an apathetic public to stem the tide of crime in this nation, our society as we know it is doomed.”
He added: “Organized crime is, in the vernacular, taking us over. First, it corrupts law enforcement and office hold ers. Second, it corrupts unions and makes a mockery of the collective ‐ bargaining concept. Third, it corrupts the business man. Organized crime... can not operate without corrupt ing law‐enforcement person nel. I flatly state that it will not even go into a muncipality unless and until it has bought its protection against raids and arrests.”
THIS was the reasoning that led Lacey to commit his most controversial act so far, his advocacy of the release of the DeCarlo tapes. Though he stood mute in open court as the DeCarlo defense fought public disclosure, he is known to have strongly favored full publicity. Governor Hughes, who left office Jan. 20, and many legal experts and con cerned citizens have been aroused by this action, ap palled at the damage that may be done to innocent persons through the publi cation of the chitchat of gangsters. Lacey, however, feels that the public good out weighs any possibility of in dividual harm. He takes the attitude that the only way the public can be made acute ly aware of the reality of the criminal menace is by pub lication of the recorded words of the mobsters themselves.
The man who takes these attitudes remains something of a conundrum to many. “I don't think they know what they're letting themselves in for, he's a dynamo,” said one of his law partners when Lacey was appointed. The prosecutor is the kind of man who does his push‐ups every morning to keep in shape. He has worked for years on a 60‐hour‐a‐week schedule. He likes to drop re mote classical allusions into routine press conferences, perhaps quoting Alexander Pope or some other favorite authority. One day baffled newsmen had difficulty get ting the point, and one of them said: “Oh, don't mind him. He's a Phi Beta Kappa and he has to show off his learning.” This leads some peo ple to think Lacey a bit pom pous, but he tells the anecdote himself, chuckling about it in high good humor.
As for the future, he says flatly: “I do not entertain any political ambitions. When took this job, I gave a com mitment to Senator Case and Attorney General Mitchell that I would stay as long as I could afford to do so financially, or until I felt I had the office organized and matters well in hand. Then all I want to do is to return to my private trial practice in New York and New Jersey.”
Law enforcement, Lacey feels, is primarily the respon sibility of the localities and the states; it is not a job for Federal authority alone. Fed eral prosecutors, he believes, can set standards, can goad and stimulate, but in the final analysis the bulk of the burden must be borne by local and state agencies. And so he has proposed a series of remedial laws for New Jersey.
One proposal that goes to the roots of the gangland structure would impose a stiff jail sentence upon any one convicted in connection with organized gambling—the bookie or the numbers run ner, for instance. In the past, all too many judges have con sidered such offenders to be small fry of little consequence and have imposed only minor fines; but Lacey argues that their activities are basic to the system that pours an es timated $50‐billion into the coffers of the crime syndicate each year.
Lacey's other proposals in clude the adoption of a state antitrust law modeled after the Federal Sherman Anti trust Act; it would give the state the power to act in cases in which gangland money has infiltrated legiti mate business and then, by extortion and threat, driven out all competition. Another cardinal Lacey proposal calls for the creation of an organ ized crime unit in the State Attorney General's office. The unit would be under the di rection of a Deputy Attorney General and would have the authority to investigate any where in the state—a provi sion that should make it more difficult for the underworld to establish its customary fix es on the local and county levels.
“In our schools and col leges,” he said, “we teach po litical science in terms of defining the powers of vari ous offices and officeholders, the requirements to vote and so forth—and all of this is largely irrelevant. Relevant instruction in political science today is going to have to be aimed at getting at the roots, at showing and explaining the decaying moral fiber of those who are elected to office, those who are in law enforce ment.
“If the younger genera tion and the university groups finally come to the terminal point in their think ing — that any government that is so corrupted isn't worthy of survival—then we who have done nothing to stop this, we who have con sented to the existence of such a system by our inaction, will have only ourselves to blame. This is the evil of or ganized crime. It corrupts and it destroys. It destroys the officeholder, and therefore destroys the confidence of the public in its government and representatives.
The answer is mixed. There is indignation in Newark, and there is also indifference. A two‐month public‐opinion poll in which a group known as Focus on Newark questioned 4,000 persons indicated that if Mayor Addonizio had been running for re‐eleotion in No vember or December he would have been favored, 2 to 1, over his nearest rival. Newsmen interviewing Newark residents came up with some who ex pressed shock and indignation, but others were like the man who shrugged his shoulders and said: “This has been go ing on for a long time. Frank ly, I don't care. I don't really care.”
If the impact of the more damaging DeCarlo tapes or the upcoming trial of Mayor Addonizio (who's been in dicted in an alleged kickback scheme involving mob‐domi nated businesses) should change this attitude, the New ark municipal election this year will probably resolve it self along racial lines. In that event, City Councilman An thony Imperiale, the karate in structor and white militant in the heavily Italian North Ward, is seen as the probable white candidate against Ken neth A. Gibson, the Negro former city engineer. Though this shabby industrial city of some 407,000 is estimated to be more than 60 per cent Ne gro and Spanish‐speaking, there are many who feel that Imperiale just might win in such a contest—a result that would certainly intensify the racial polarization of Newark.
EVEN Lacey concedes that the reaction to his probe falls short of the universal cry of outrage he might have wish ed. On the one hand, he has been highly praised by re sponsible citizens, and an en couraging number of tips have come from the public. “We have received many let ters and telephone calls of fering information,” he says. “Most of these are anony mous, but in cases where peo ple are willing to identify themselves we keep their identity absolutely confiden tial, of course. Some of the tips obviously come from crackpots, but there have been, nevertheless, what would regard as a startling number of good leads.”
This is encouraging. Far less so is the old bromide that Lacey hears time and again: “You are always go ing to have crime and corrup tion.” The implicit corollary to that is, of course, “So why are you getting so excited about it?”
“To that, I say, ‘Yes, but you are always going to have to have people who are will ing to fight it. It is true that there always have been and always will be people who have frailties and who yield to temptation, but that is only part of the story. If our system is to survive, there must also be people who are willing to fight, willing to op pose, this kind of corrup tion.’” ■
