William G. Kagler, the hard-driving president of the Kroger Company, has impatiently pushed the food retailer in the last few years to adapt to a more competitive industry. Apparently, he pushed a little too hard.
Kroger executives and analysts said the dispute between Mr. Kagler and Mr. Everingham, 60, centered on how fast the company should proceed with plans to further streamline and rid itself of problem operations.
Mr. Kagler, they said, wanted to jump in to clean up poorly performing regions such as Texas, while simultaneously handling the various elements of a widespread restructuring announced this summer. Mr. Everingham, they said, wanted to concentrate on the plans already in motion.
Kroger, the nation's second-largest supermarket company after Safeway Stores Inc., said in July that it would close 100 unprofitable supermarkets, sell its Superx and Hook drug store chains and cut headquarters expenses by 25 percent through an early retirement plan for 250 employees. The company had net earnings last year of $181 million, or $4.09 a share, on sales of $17.1 billion. Pressure From The Street
The changes at Kroger, which is based in Cincinnati, come at a time that supermarket companies are under increasing pressure from Wall Street to cut costs and get their stock prices up to reflect the value of their operations and their often substantial real-estate holdings. Big food retailers are also facing more competition from local and regional retailers and are being forced to adapt to the needs of more discerning consumers.
''Kagler's presence the last few years got a lot of things done,'' said Susan C. Schmierer, an analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities. ''From here on, what needs to be done necessitates a slower approach.''
Mr. Kagler, who has been president since January 1983, joined the company in 1964 in the public relations department. He was made a corporate vice president in 1974. Mr. Everingham joined Kroger in 1946, working in the produce department of a store in Michigan. He held a variety of corporate positions before being named chairman in 1979. Mr. Pichler was the president of Dillon when it was acquired by Kroger in 1983.
Mr. Kagler was described by analysts and Kroger executives as impatient and a risk taker. His personality, they said, clashed with that of Mr. Everingham, who was said to be more cautious and to prefer a more orderly approach to overhauling the company. Hare and Tortoise Comparison
''The very essence of a corporation is individuals working together to reach commonly agreed goals under the same philosophical umbrella,'' Mr. Everingham said. ''Bill Kagler and I share the same goals for Kroger, but we differed over the approach to reach those goals.''
In recent months, a number of large food retailing concerns have found themselves the targets of takeovers by investors who believe their stock is undervalued. Safeway Stores agreed to a leveraged buyout with Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts & Company after the Dart Group began a takeover attempt. Lucky Stores recently rejected a takeover offer from Asher B. Edelman, the New York investor, who is reportedly considering starting a tender offer for the company. Purging Operations
Many supermarket companies, including Kroger, have been purging underperforming stores and regions from their operations, while building larger stores that sell a broad array of merchandise, including more-profitable non-food and fresh items, and reducing their manufacturing operations.
Analysts say Kroger has done a good job of decentralizing decision-making to allow managers to respond more quickly to consumer preferences, while de-emphasizing its manufacturing operations. They said that Mr. Pichler was a good choice to succeed Mr. Kagler because of his success in running a decentralized operation at Dillon.
Kroger has also been cutting costs, partly through confrontations with labor unions that earned Mr. Kagler a reputation as a hard-liner and tough bargainer. Kroger several times closed stores when employees refused to make wage concessions.
The reorganization, which was announced in mid-July, will mean fewer food and other retail stores, and a smaller staff at the company's headquarters. Before After Food stores 1,300 1,200 Retail drugstores 890 0 Convenience stores 700 700 Headquarters personnel* 1,000 750 *Personnel reduction through a voluntary retirement program. Source: The Kroger Company WHERE KROGER RANKS The 10 largest supermarket chains, ranked by sales as of Dec. 31, 1985. In billions of dollars. Safeway Stores Inc. $19.7 The Kroger Company 17.1 American Stores Company 13.9 Lucky Stores Inc. 9.3 Winn-Dixie Stores Inc. 7.8 Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company 6.6 Supermarkets General Corporation 5.1 Albertson's Inc. 5.0 Stop and Shop Supermarkets 3.7 Publix Super Market Inc. 3.5 Source: Progressive Grocer
