TARUNI SETH, a mother of two who lives in Berkeley Heights may not know it, but she is a hot commodity in New Jersey grocers' circles. Her family's monthly grocery bill may seem insignificant in an industry that sells tens of millions of dollars in products statewide, but because she divides her time between Stop & Shop, Whole Foods and Kings, her shopping dollars are at play.
And in one of the country's most hotly contested markets, not being loyal to one store is akin to being an undecided voter during an election year. Only instead of two major parties, there are at least half-dozen stores trying to gain her good graces. And instead of stump speeches, there are limitless incentives.
If Ms. Seth made it out to the Branchburg ShopRite, for example, she would find that children under 9 who spend time in the store-staffed playhouse can get manicures. Or if she were in the Tom's River area, she would be able to use her shopping dollars at Foodtown to earn enough points for a waffle maker or a pearl necklace.
A bit closer to home, the Raritan Stop & Shop offers convenience rather than freebies: drivers can maneuver their minivans past the store entrance and wait while groceries that were ordered online are loaded in the back.
These stores are no exception. Grocery stores and supermarkets across the state are seeking to lure and retain customers with promotions that go well beyond listing markdowns on store circulars. Tidy aisles have sprouted a surplus of bells and whistles, seeking to establish themselves as suburban centers where everything from day care to banking to cooking lessons are available.
While regional grocery retailers in other states were swallowed in the late 90's by supermarket giants like Kroger, New Jersey's powerhouse grocers -- Kings, A.&P., Pathmark, ShopRite and Foodtown all are headquartered here -- were spared, clearing the way for a statewide, share-hungry battleground among the holdouts in a state that experts say has a particularly tight market. Larger chains with headquarters elsewhere have joined the fray as well in a bid to outdo their New Jersey-based competitors. The result: a dizzying flurry of supermarket enhancements that shows no sign of letting up.
"It's become way more difficult," said Phil Scaduto, a vice president of marketing for Foodtown, a cooperative that has 52 outlets throughout the state. Mr. Scaduto's grandfather John Azzolina opened the first Foodtown market in Highlands in the 1920's. "There are bigger players now, and the larger chains are moving in, so that a lot of groups like us have gone by the wayside."
Not only do the state's grocers face competition from supermarket giants such as Stop & Shop, a Quincy, Mass.,-based company whose 53 stores in New Jersey make up more than a seventh of its total, and from ACME, based in Malvern, Pa., which has 61 of its 138 stores in the state. Big box stores are also encroaching on the grocers' traditional turf.
"We can't just myopically look at ShopRites, because we're also in competition with non-supermarkets," said Rich Savner, director of public affairs for Pathmark, based in Carteret. "We have to consider the Walgreens, the Rite Aids, Costco, Sam's, Target and Wal-Mart and also the dollar stores that sell some of the same things we do."
Meredith Adler, senior equity analyst for Lehman Brothers, pointed out that such a highly splintered market is peculiar to the state. "When you look at the market share data, it's very fragmented," she said. "There are many players, and there's no big market shares."
But if there is any advantage to the regional chains' position, it is that they are in a part of the country where sprawling sites necessary to open stores like Wal-Mart are expensive, Ms. Adler added. Nationally, she said, the growth of nontraditional food sellers in New Jersey, "is nothing compared to the rest of the country."
Regionals are trying hard to keep that bias tilted in their favor. Leading the pack, according to Mark Hamstra, retail and financial editor at industry trade magazine Supermarket News, is ShopRite. Wakefern, the co-op's supplier, which scans more than $7 billion in sales each year, "is strong on its own -- historically on the cutting edge." "
For ShopRite customers, that means a panoply of services few would associate with grocery stores. In addition to the Scrunchy's Playhouses, or in-store day care centers available at no cost to parents at a handful of stores, six New Jersey ShopRites have begun offering online ordering in the last year, with pick-up that does not require drivers to leave their vehicles. There are also self-checkout lanes, Dunkin' Donuts counters, T-Mobile cellphone dealers, North Fork Bank branches, dry cleaners, cigar shops, Chinese and pizza takeout counters, "culinary workshops" and loftlike seating areas for in-store dining. Foodtown, the smaller of the co-ops, lags by comparison. After an unsuccessful foray into self-checkouts in the early 90's, the company scotched the high-tech approach to drawing regulars. The focus is now on an incentive program that gives customers 10 points for every $100 spent; the points can be used toward food discounts or for products in a catalog that sells everything from bicycles to hairdryers.
Cheryl Good, manager of community relations at Kings touted the chain's four cooking schools, in Bedminster, Hillsdale, Short Hills and Verona. The five-week intensive "principles of cooking," which costs $150, mom-and-tot classes and demos by cookbook authors draw an affluent customer base, one attuned to "the things that cost us a little bit more to operate, like higher standards for sanitation and quality."
Despite the emphasis on incentives and enhancements, where both co-operatives throw banana peels in the paths of their national competitors, said Ms. Adler of Lehman Brothers, is in their pricing. The regional stores can manage to keep their prices low. "They can afford to do that because they have individual owners -- they're not trying to generate good profits every quarter," she said. "They don't have any shareholders to please. Some of the owners are public, but they're very small." But the incentives may not pay off in the long run. Mr. Hamstra of Supermarket News noted: "I don't have any data to show that any of these are working for the regionals. The thing is, they're competing with each other -- once one chain starts offering something they all feel they need to offer something. Nobody wants to let the other guy get a hand up."
But she responds to the old-fashioned way of netting customers. "If they have a great sale at ShopRite or Pathmark, like a great deal on Coke, I'll end up going and buying 10 other things," she noted.
Jill Johnson of South Orange, who regularly shops at ShopRite -- with occasional detours to Whole Foods -- seems to favor more high-tech incentives. "I also do online ordering from the ShopRite in Clarke -- that's the closest one that has online ordering -- out of convenience. It's a lot easier to order food online and just go pick it up than to bring kids in the store," she noted.
If Mr. Hamstra of Supermarket News's dire forecast for the regional grocers is true, shoppers should enjoy the scramble over their grocery dollars while they can. He suspects that modern-day New Jersey cart-pushers will wind up feeding at the same superstore trough as the rest of the country, and soon.
"What's different about New Jersey that's not the case for most other states is that Wal-Mart Supercenters haven't opened here yet, and they're considered one of the main competitive threats to the industry.
