Gilbert White’s Selborne Journal: Thursday, 27 May 1784: 29 7/10; 59; W. Sun & clouds, brisk gale, bright gleam. Distant thunder. Young red-breasts. St. foin begins to blossom. Honey-suckle against the wall begins to open. Lime trees shew their bracteal leaves, & rudiment of fruit. Wall-nut trees shed their catkins and show rudiments of fruit. Maples shew fruit. My great single oak shews many catkins.
We are in the thick of a forest tent caterpillar infestation. I walked down to the barn last evening to do chores and everywhere I looked I could see caterpillars rappelling down from the canopy overhead. The crowns of the maple saplings are thick with them, their leaves eaten down to the rib. I looked up at the boughs high above the drive and though the leaves on some were dark with shadow, others had been turned into mere tracery. The caterpillars line up on pump handles and gates, on the electric fence, on the edges of the chicken houses. They dangle from the web strung across the chicken yard to keep out goshawks. The ducks don’t like the caterpillars. I don’t think the chickens do either. This morning I watched Remedy reach over and take a bite of burdock that had some caterpillars on it. He bit down, paused, opened his mouth and walked away. We are all disgusted.
For more information on these creatures, you might take a look at this link. It has some reasonably consoling information. The defoliation these caterpillars cause can seriously reduce a tree’s growth but doesn’t usually kill it. The real trouble is that these outbreaks come in cycles that seem to last 3 years.
In the past, I have used BT (Bacillus thuringiensis) to treat our apple trees, with rather impressive results. But lately I have been reading One Straw Revolution by Masanobu Fukuoka and he is making me rethink my strategy. Although Fukuoka’s focus is rice, he advocates the least intervention possible, arguing that natural pests will be managed, at least to some degree, by natural predators. I suspect that were I to let the caterpillars have their way with my fruit trees for a year, I would end up with little or no fruit. Instead, some local population of spiders or ants would have a bounty of juicy caterpillars. Viewed from that perspective, leaving the caterpillars to their own devices does not seem like a disastrous outcome.
Do you spray or do anything else to get rid of the caterpillars? Do they have any natural predators? Do they stay all summer? Ugh, it makes me shiver to think of these creepy things all around where I might live or work.
I also have used Bt in the past to try to protect our oaks and to reduce the number of larvae that crawl up the sides of our house and barn, where they pupate, seemingly in the thousands. I decided that somehow the oaks and moths have both lived together for thousands of years or more, so I have given up on Bt. These larvae do not eat the corn, beans, cherry trees, and other crops. They are fixated on oaks. A few days in the nineties will kill most of the crawlers, not the cocoons.
I’m upstate (Niskayuna)–and my backyard, which has glorious big oak trees in a canopy, is simply infested with these bugs. The worse thing is the hail of poppy-seed like stuff on our deck and pool (what is this??) The larvae are gross enough, but the hail of poppy-seed crud is really awful. I really hope for the long run that the tees are not stressed–the link was a little comforting in that regard.
Here in the hills of eastern Tuscany (and elsewhere in the region, I’m told) it’s the oaks (or one type of oak and I’m sorry I don’t know which) that the little green caterpillars go for. This is the second year in a row that the trees are quite decimated, left with ghostly skeletons of leaves. I wonder if this is a world-wide phenomenon. I’m relieved to hear we may only have to endure one more year of this–isn’t the stress on the tree tremendous? And does this have anything to do with climate change or is it part of the natural cycle of being? Nancy Jenkins
VK: As far as I understand it, the caterpillar infestation–at least the one here in the Northeast–is just part of the natural cycle. But your question is an indicator of how psychologically unsettling climate change can really be.
Verlyn Klinkenborg joined the editorial board in 1997. He is the author of "Making Hay," "The Last Fine Time," "The Rural Life" and "Timothy; Or, Notes of an Abject Reptile" (Author Events, WNYC Appearance). Born in Colorado and raised in Iowa and California, Mr. Klinkenborg now lives in Columbia County, New York.
