For millions of families, finding an affordable place to call home is a growing challenge. In the past five years alone, average rents have risen nearly 25%, while earnings have lagged – increasing by less than 15%. This dilemma has grown to the point where 6 out 10 American renters struggle to pay their rent and nearly half – 44% – of those who are struggling have moved.
What is driving these challenges? The primary cause is a shortage of affordable rental housing. This is especially the case in major cities, which are struggling to keep up as more Americans move to urban areas in search of opportunity. In the fastest growing cities, very low-income families have been hit particularly hard, as one-third of rental units affordable to them have disappeared in just the past seven years.
“The market doesn’t provide adequately for those with the lowest incomes,” said Andrew Aurand, vice president for research at the National Low Income Housing Coalition “We have seen a decline over the last two decades of low-cost rental homes.”
One of the latest examples is Freddie Mac’s substantial focus on Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC)-eligible properties. These equity investments target underserved populations in both rural and urban areas, including communities that need intensive supportive services and regions recovering from natural disasters. The company invested $500 million in LIHTC equity last year and plans to do the same again in 2019.
These investments are in addition to the company’s $8 billion in financing for properties that provide housing for very low-income residents and underserved communities. These mortgages usually involve housing units that are in some way rent restricted, and they often require multiple sources of capital, including federal, state, or local subsidies and funds from nonprofit organizations.
In some cases, when rent restrictions are not in place, Freddie Mac goes the extra mile to match impact investors with mission-focused borrowers. The resulting investments help preserve affordable housing and prevent residents from being priced out of their market-rate apartments. These transactions can even involve voluntary agreements that restrict rent increases.
Underlying all this work is a commitment to credit quality, prudent underwriting practices and market expertise. This discipline attracts private investors to Freddie Mac securities, which helps channel capital to these affordable rental properties.
“We put every property, every loan, every investment through the paces,” said Steve Lansbury, senior vice president of Multifamily Underwriting for Freddie Mac. “Our underwriting practices lead the industry and have for many years. That’s why we have an extremely low delinquency rate where other industry players have struggled. Our support for affordability in the marketplace and diligent underwriting go hand in hand.”
Essential to this effort is Freddie Mac’s local market expertise. The company has offices around the country tasked with ensuring that every loan purchased has quality real estate collateral, a sustainable cash flow and meets strict liquidity requirements. Freddie Mac also leverages its local expertise to better understand how a property and its sponsors stack up against others in the market.
“We are demonstrating that it is possible to meet our affordability mission while adhering to strict credit standards,” said Debby Jenkins, who leads Freddie Mac Multifamily. “It’s core to our mandate, and it’s what our investors and U.S. taxpayers expect. By maintaining credit discipline, we serve as a stabilizing force in the market, while encouraging investment in properties that are affordable to low-income families and members of the essential workforce.”
Overall, Freddie Mac provided $78 billion in financing to the multifamily market last year. More than 90% of the 866,000 rental units the company financed were affordable to low-income and workforce households.
