Sure looks like it. I wrote a column a month ago sympathizing with Dow Chemical and its unwillingness to complete its $15 billion purchase of Rohm & Haas, the Philadelphia-based specialty chemical company. The essential Dow Chemical position was that the economy had deteriorated so badly since the deal was first signed — and Dow Chemical had lost the bulk of its financing — that forcing the two companies to merge could potentially be ruinous to the combined entity. Dow’s lawyers filed legal briefs arguing that even though the deal had been signed, the court had the right to take these circumstances into account and effectively void the merger. Rohm & Haas, on the other hand, argued that a deal was a deal and that Dow Chemical could not wriggle out of it.
A lot of readers thought I was nuts to take Dow’s side in this dispute, and judging by what happened today, it looks like they were right. On the eve of the scheduled trial, the two companies settled the dispute. But it is about as one-sided a settlement as you’ll ever see. Under the new revised terms, how much is Dow Chemical paying for Rohm & Haas? Er, $15 billion. What Dow got was a few nice fig leafs, including the ability to extend by a year repayment terms of a $12.5 billion bridge loan. And the hedge fund manager John Paulson and the Haas Family Trust have agreed to purchase $2.5 billion in preferred stock in Dow Chemical after the deal closes. “The restructuring of the terms of the transaction allows Dow to maintain financial flexibility as we proceed to implement our strategy in a way that realizes the original promise of this acquisition,” the Dow chairman and chief executive, Andrew N. Liveris, said according to the news release.
Let’s hope so. Still and all, the bottom line is that Dow is buying Rohm & Haas for the same price it originally agreed to. And I’m not hearing anybody on the Dow side now saying that the deal is too onerous in these difficult economic times.
Seems to me that Dow did just fine, thanks. Basically, they did exactly what they said they’d do, except by making a big fuss over it, they managed to get the Trust to put up 1/6th of the money, plus a better financing deal.
We’ll see what happens as this unfolds. The critics may be right that Dow had to abide by the contract, but as others in the chemical business have seen it is not a good time to be a large cyclical company with a mound of debt.
you miss the whole point of the settlement….it was not a one-sided settlement at all. The whole situation changed over the weekend. Let’s not forget the big issue was the banks being able to pull the financing should a combined company not meet the 4.25 debt/ebitda leverage test. Had the deal gone through at its original terms, Dow would not have met that test in the first quarter – the banks could have pulled its financing and the company could essentially be bankrupt.
So, as a result, over the weekend, Dow, basically, got a cash infusion of $3 billion, it credit ratings got stabilized, the banks amended the terms of the loan to 5.75 leverage test, (allowing it to raise debt capital of $4.3 billion) and then Dow can now use ROH’s assets to pay down this debt ($4 billion). None of this was there before and you can make the argument that the cash infusion and revised terms, in actuality, has reduced the amount that DOW had to pay ROH to acquire its shares.
After all DOW did a very impressive media spinning program and was still doing so just 48 hours ago when their pr flack was quoted in several wire services as saying a $78 all cash deal did not work. (But that is exactly what we got; however; two investors with large ROH positions agreed to purchase some very fairly priced DOW equity securities.) And DOW was still spinning in its press release yesterday when it emphasized the substantial concessions it achieved over the weekend (and continued in its investor presentation last night).
Great, Dow rolled the dice, their stake was a deal with Kuwait that burped, the were already the biggest chemical producer in the U.S., couldn’t read the tea leaves on chemical feedstock prices and demand, bought Rohm and Haas, and on the way, destroyed lon-term shareholders, ruined retirees’ income from dividends and ruined the company.
There's no business like big business — or at least there isn't to Joe Nocera, the Talking Business columnist for The Times. He loves exposing the hurly-burly of clashing executive egos, the deal-making bravura, and the occasional (or not so occasional) stumbles that powerful executives make. But he also loves pointing out those (more than occasional) times when they get it right. Executive Suite offers his take on topics from Steve Jobs and iPhones to the future of General Motors — and much more.
