Locast streams network shows and sports programs through a free app that relays broadcast feeds online. People can get the streams without a cable or satellite plan, potentially cutting off licensing fees to the broadcasters. (More traditionally, viewers can also receive broadcast signals over the air, at no charge, with a digital antenna.)
In July, the networks banded together to sue Locast, arguing that it had violated their copyrights and chipped away at the revenue they get from pay-television operators like AT&T and Comcast. The networks are expected to receive more than $10 billion in such fees this year.
Under federal law, broadcast stations must provide their signals free to the public, making network programming easily available through the use of an antenna. But broadcasters won a provision in copyright law in the 1990s that required pay-TV providers to negotiate what are known as retransmission-consent fees to carry those signals.
“We believe the broadcasters’ lawsuit was brought without basis as part of a larger plan to unlawfully limit the public’s right to access that free programming,” David Hosp, a lawyer for Locast, said in a statement.
“We trust the courts to see right through this facade and recognize Locast for what it is — not a public service organization but a creature of certain pay-TV interests with an entirely commercial agenda,” said Gerson Zweifach, an attorney for the broadcasters, in a statement.
Locast’s countersuit, filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, is the legal response to the broadcasters. In addition to denying their allegations, the nonprofit, led by Mr. Goodfriend, put a twist on the proceedings, arguing that the big broadcasters have “colluded” as part of an effort to undermine and shut down Locast by “threatening business retaliation” against any potential partners.
According to the complaint, Google executives alerted Locast in April that the networks had warned the tech company not to allow YouTubeTV to provide access to Locast. If it did, according to the complaint, Google would be “punished by the big four broadcasters.”
The broadcasters — working together — could put pressure on Google (and other pay-TV operators) by refusing to sell rights to cable channels that are allied with the broadcast networks, the complaint suggests.
ABC and ESPN, for example, are both controlled by the Walt Disney Company. NBC and the USA cable channel are owned by NBCUniversal, while the broadcast station Fox and the cable network Fox News are controlled by the Murdoch family. CBS, which owns the Pop TV and Showtime cable networks, recently agreed to merge with Viacom, which owns MTV and Nickelodeon.
The complaint also accuses the networks of failing to transmit their over-the-air signals with enough power, thereby “forcing consumers” to pay for cable or satellite service, or the broadcasters’ own direct streaming services.
Locast sits mostly under the radar, but it has gained in popularity at a time when more consumers are watching television digitally. More than 700,000 users are signed up in 13 cities, including Chicago, Los Angeles, New York, San Francisco and Washington.
The networks have argued that the service is designed to rob them of licensing fees, calling Locast a “rogue streaming service skirting the law for the benefit of telecom giants” in their complaint, which was also filed in the Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Tensions around programming costs have increased as more viewers cut the cord. On Thursday, over 2.5 million Dish subscribers were blacked out of Fox broadcasts after Fox and Dish couldn’t agree on a contract renewal.
Although Locast relies on donations from viewers, it accepts money from corporations and recently received $500,000 from AT&T, which also operates the DirecTV satellite service. When a fee dispute blacked out CBS for more than 6.5 million AT&T television subscribers for a few weeks this summer, AT&T encouraged its users to try Locast.
The escalating legal fight is reminiscent of a courtroom showdown between the networks and Aereo, a start-up backed by the media tycoon Barry Diller. Aereo captured over-the-air TV signals and streamed them to subscribers for a monthly fee but did not pay the networks anything. Mr. Diller lost the legal challenge in 2014 when the Supreme Court ruled Aereo had violated copyright laws.
Mr. Goodfriend started Locast partly as a thought experiment on the Aereo case, which he taught in a law lecture at Georgetown University. He wanted to show how the ruling might affect the public interest.
“I had to teach them that more often than not, it’s through huge stakeholders battling it out that change happens,” Mr. Goodfriend told The New York Times in January. “There should be something that challenges the broadcasters.”
