Television is undergoing a wrenching change. Companies like Netflix and Google TV are lining up to offer movies and TV online. Cable systems are developing online bundles as they add broadband customers but lose TV subscribers. Broadcast networks are still figuring out how to sell their shows online, and charging cable systems more as ad money moves to the Internet.
Amid this change, Comcast, the biggest cable system in the country, proposed last year to buy NBC Universal, which controls Universal Studios, cable channels like Bravo and USA, and the NBC and Telemundo broadcast networks. It is eager to get approval from the Federal Communications Commission and the Department of Justice’s antitrust division this year.
Regulators do not need to rush. The combined company would have the ability, and the incentive, to hamstring online innovation. The F.C.C. and the Justice Department must carefully assess potential threats to the new competition and put precise conditions on a merger to prevent the new media goliath from stamping it out.
This is not the classic “horizontal merger” between two companies that do the same thing. Comcast produces little television and NBC does not own cable. The issue is that the merged company would own both a major producer of TV and movies and the dominant distributor of TV and movies in big media markets. It would have about a quarter of the multichannel market and about a fifth of broadband subscribers.
Online TV is particularly vulnerable. Unlike cable, online providers are not covered by program access rules that force networks to provide their programs on reasonable terms. Companies like Netflix and Hulu — which is owned by several TV networks, including NBC — get shows from TV networks and movie studios and distribute them on somebody else’s broadband.
This platform could one day allow viewers to buy whatever show they wanted, on any broadband service provider or cable TV plan, anywhere in the country. To Comcast, this prospect is fairly threatening. It would undermine its ability to keep customers inside its ecosystem of cable and broadband, where it has control over its bundles and has more pricing power. In combination with NBC Universal, it could do a lot to stop or slow the online revolution.
What if the combined company limited access to its shows online to subscribers of its broadband service or cable packages? Or if it refused to provide NBC Universal content to rival online services? It could degrade the online signal of rivals, or charge through the roof to transmit their content to its broadband subscribers.
Recently, Level 3 Communications, which operates a broadband backbone that interconnects content suppliers and service providers, revealed that shortly after it cut a deal with Netflix to carry its movies, Comcast demanded an extra toll to pipe its content to subscribers.
If the merger between Comcast and NBC is to be approved, these tactics must be put off limits. The merged company must be made to provide content not only to rival cable systems but also to Internet-only rivals, on reasonable terms. And it should also commit, in a legally binding way, to offer reasonably priced broadband subscriptions independent of its TV bundles.
