It was the sweat of an unknown civil servant who took his duty to protect life and property seriously, and who had just been told a terrible secret: A tall building in the middle of Manhattan was in danger of falling over in a high wind.
For me, a student reporter hearing about the episode from Mr. Gibson a year later, it was an unforgettable lesson on why it matters that we are able to trust government weather people to give us the forecasts straight.
That’s also why President Trump’s incorrect tweet warning of hurricane risk to Alabama — and the apparently hand-altered map he later displayed to justify it, and his administration’s ham-handed attempt to undermine correct weather forecasts by government scientists — cannot be written off as mere Twitter slapstick gone haywire. So much depends on the frail membranes of credibility.
On Aug. 8, 1978, three men arrived at Mr. Gibson’s office in Rockefeller Center. Two were with the Red Cross, in charge of disaster preparations. The third was a structural engineer, Leslie E. Robertson, an expert in tall buildings who had been hired by Citibank to review the strength of its shining new addition to the Manhattan skyline, the Citicorp Center in Midtown.
“There’s another situation — less likely, but still possible,” Mr. Gibson told them. “A hurricane has winds of at least 75 miles per hour, sustained for hours.” That would not sneak up on them: Storms would be tracked as they formed and moved up the coast.
When it opened in 1977, the Citicorp Center was the 11th-tallest building in the world. It contained more than 40 million pounds of structural steel and stood along Lexington Avenue from 53rd Street to 54th, one of the most crowded areas in the country. (The building is now called 601 Lexington.)
A few months earlier, an engineering student had inquired about the calculations for wind loads used by the structural engineer who designed the tower, William LeMessurier. As he would tell the story, this prompted him to check his firm’s work. It turned out that the skyscraper had weaknesses that would make it vulnerable to collapse in a storm that occurred, on average, every 16 years in New York. That meant that in any given year, the building had a 1 in 16 possibility of facing a destructive storm: a 6 percent chance of failure.
One day after the meeting at the Weather Service in Rockefeller Center, the city’s three main daily newspapers went on strike for 88 days. Very few people knew what was going on at Citicorp, much less how serious it was.
Most citizens turn over the job of measuring risk to the government, which in 1978 meant people like Mr. Gibson, just as it does in 2019. Civil servants track the weather and make the calls that mean the difference between life and death. As Michael Lewis writes in his book, “The Fifth Risk,” figuring out how to convey warnings at the right moment — to be trustworthy — is central to the National Weather Service’s mission of keeping people alive.
Construction workers arrived and began ripping open the interior walls at Citicorp Center. Working at night, they welded steel plates onto giant chevrons that had previously been bolted together, strengthening the building.
They were still early in the project on Sept. 1 when a storm formed into a hurricane off Florida and began moving up the coast. Then it veered out to sea. Mr. Gibson thought about the ridiculed astronomer in the movie. What if Mr. Gibson were to suddenly announce that Midtown Manhattan was in danger of being destroyed by … wind? It was what Mr. Lewis in his book classified as the most dangerous risk, the kind that no one could imagine.
He knew that was unlikely, as the mayor’s office had also been told about the problem. Still, graveyards are full of people who blew off warnings about hurricanes and tornadoes. And really: Midtown Manhattan was going to topple?
I never forgot how seriously he took his job. In 1980, I sent an account of these events to a magazine. The rejection letter said something like: “This is an interesting story. However, since the building did NOT fall down, it is not newsworthy.”
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.
