Recently, I wrote about how Musso & Frank, an iconic Hollywood restaurant, has managed to stay in business for a century in a rapidly transforming California. I wondered the same about Rumiano, which celebrated its 100th birthday late last month.
“They were supplying the armed forces with what we call American-style cheese,” Mr. Rumiano said, made by taking a natural cheese and remelting it with salt and other preservatives to make it shelf-stable.
That’s a big reason the company that had brought processed cheese to California was also among the first to hop aboard the organic foods train. About 70 percent of the company’s milk comes from organic dairy farms, it says, many of which have also been in business for generations.
Cheese companies, he said, must contend with shifts in government policies, weather patterns and consumer tastes. Over the past decade, higher costs of water and land have driven family dairy farms away from California.
We’re in the homestretch for bills currently before lawmakers in Sacramento. They have until Friday to send them on to the governor’s desk, before he has a month to veto them or sign them into law. Which means there’s been a flurry of activity at and around the Capitol.
Gov. Gavin Newsom signed into law new rules restricting medical exemptions for vaccines. The move followed a raucous day at the Capitol, during which officers arrested anti-vaccine protesters after they shut down the Assembly and blocked entrances to the building. [The Sacramento Bee]
Lawmakers approved a bill that would allow student athletes to get compensated for their names and likenesses. The measure’s supporters include LeBron James and its opponents include the N.C.A.A., which sees it as an existential threat. [The New York Times]
A big expansion of California’s “red flag” gun law is headed to Mr. Newsom’s desk. The measure was introduced after a string of mass shootings, and although the governor hasn’t committed to signing any gun bill, he has said he is interested in gun control proposals. [The Los Angeles Times]
This week, legislators are expected to pass Assembly Bill 5, which would expand protections for gig economy workers, including ride-hail drivers. Labor groups around the country are paying attention. [The New York Times]
Senator Kamala Harris unveiled a sweeping criminal justice reform proposal that aims to reduce mass incarceration by embracing ideas that have gone from the policy fringe to largely progressive consensus, including ending mandatory minimum sentences, eliminating private prisons and legalizing marijuana. [The New York Times]
U.S.C.’s athletic director, Lynn Swann, resigned on Monday after three years in the job. The announcement comes after new revelations about U.S.C.’s deep entanglement in the huge college admissions fraud case. [The New York Times]
Law enforcement searches at the offices of the company that operated the boat that was engulfed in flames during Labor Day weekend, killing 34 people, suggest that criminal charges could be possible. [The New York Times]
San Francisco International Airport turned into travel purgatory when officials closed one runway over the weekend. Airlines had already reduced their flight schedules to prepare for the construction project. [The San Francisco Chronicle]
Jacqueline Stewart, a film archivist and professor, will be Turner Classic Movies’s first black host. The network, which shows a vast array of films from across the decades (without commercials), recently celebrated its 25th anniversary. [The New York Times]
Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.
