Valero Energy, the country’s largest independent refiner, said on Wednesday that it would buy seven ethanol plants from VeraSun Energy for $477 million, giving the biofuel industry a lift at a time when it is suffering from excess production capacity and falling gasoline consumption.
VeraSun, the nation’s second-largest ethanol producer after Archer Daniels Midland, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection last fall. Valero’s purchase signals important new support for a flagging industry from an unexpected quarter. In recent years, refiners have opposed Congressional mandates for refineries to blend increasing amounts of ethanol in gasoline, arguing that it made neither economic nor environmental sense.
Valero competed with Archer Daniels Midland in an auction, and the purchase was approved at a Delaware bankruptcy hearing on Wednesday. Valero originally entered an agreement to buy five plants for $280 million last month, contingent on the auction. The price Valero paid for the plants — in South Dakota, Iowa, Minnesota, Nebraska and Indiana — is a fraction of what it would cost to build new ones.
“It’s a good deal for Valero because they have to have ethanol in their blend mandated by the federal government,” said Chris Ruppel, an energy analyst at Execution, a Connecticut brokerage firm. “Ethanol is still a lousy business, but if you can buy the plants for cents on the dollar, it looks a lot better as Washington is likely to keep mandated production targets.”
VeraSun, like many ethanol companies, has suffered financially in recent months after committing to buy corn last year at high prices. Those prices have since dropped sharply. In the meantime, ethanol prices have declined along with gasoline since last summer.
Only a year ago, ethanol appeared to be the transportation fuel of the future. Congress had mandated the doubling of corn ethanol use, to 15 billion gallons by 2015. Meanwhile, with gasoline prices soaring along with the cost of a barrel of oil, refiners were willing to blend cheaper ethanol into fuels to keep costs down at the pump.
Furthermore, with ethanol blend levels limited at 10 percent for most auto fuels, declining gasoline consumption means less room in the market for the development of more advanced biofuels, like ethanol made from switchgrass and wood chips.
Congress set a target of using 21 billion gallons of advanced biofuels by the year 2022, a goal some energy experts say will be difficult to reach unless the economy grows robustly over the next several years.
A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B3 of the New York edition with the headline: Valero Energy, the Oil Refiner, Wins an Auction for 7 Ethanol Plants. Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe
