HCA plans to raise $4.6 billion in its third initial public offering of common stock, more than three years after the hospital chain was taken private in a leveraged buyout by a group of private equity investors, The Associated Press reports.
HCA’s plans were made public on Friday as four I.P.O.s were postponed after the Dow Jones industrial average dropped nearly 1,000 points Thursday and investors grew increasingly worried that the growing European debt crisis could have daunting repercussions for American corporations that do business in Europe.
Initial public offerings of the Smiles Brand Group, dental office services provider; Ryerson Holding, a metals processor; and Madison Square Capital, a real estate investment trust, were all delayed Friday, with no expected trading date. MIE Holdings, a Chinese oil company, has not been officially delayed, but will not begin trading this week.
HCA did not set a price for the shares or say how many it planned to sell. But it said in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission that it expected gross proceeds of about $2.5 billion, not including any extra shares it may sell to its underwriters to cover excess demand. It will use the funds to pare $26.86 billion in debt and for general corporate purposes.
HCA operates 162 hospitals and 106 surgery centers in 20 states and the United Kingdom. In its S.E.C. filing it said it provided up to 5 percent of all American hospital services as the largest, nongovernment hospital operator in the United States, and it has a “substantial market presence” in 14 of the 25 fastest-growing American markets.
“We believe we are well positioned in a number of large and growing markets that will allow us the opportunity to generate long-term, attractive growth through the expansion of our presence in these markets,” the company said in the filing.
In 2006, a group of investors including Bain Capital, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts and Merrill Lynch Global Private Equity took the company private again in a $21 billion leveraged buyout. That came as HCA struggled with sliding earnings and escalating expenses for the uninsured.
Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Citigroup and JPMorgan Chase are leading a large group of underwriters for the latest offering. The list includes Barclays Capital, Credit Suisse, Deutsche Bank Securities, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and Wells Fargo.
