Dr. Wen, a 36-year-old physician, had used innovative policies to combat the opioid epidemic and delivered a widely watched TED Talk. She regularly appeared on lists of the most influential health care leaders and government officials.
But Dr. Wen’s tenure at Planned Parenthood was rocky and short, ending after eight months on Tuesday when the board of directors ousted her following several weeks of tense and sometimes acrimonious negotiations.
Current and former Planned Parenthood officials describe Dr. Wen as a smart but alienating manager who wanted to significantly reorient the group’s focus away from the abortion wars and more toward its role as a women’s health provider.
So last week, Dr. Leana Wen posted a two-paragraph statement, where she said, “I am leaving because the new board chairs and I have philosophical differences over the direction and the future of Planned Parenthood.”
So this was really a difference about who Planned Parenthood is. Are they a major advocate for abortion rights who are going to be fighting all these bans on abortion that we’re seeing, or are they primarily a chain of 600 health clinics that are filling in the safety net of the United States?
Right, and I think a core question is do they, at this particular moment for abortion rights in America, do they have the luxury of choosing to be one or the other, or do they have to be two really different things at the exact same time?
She is a doctor and a health care professional by training. She is someone who is showing up on all these lists of rising stars in health care, an influential person, and she has a really impressive resume.
Becoming a doctor was my dream. When I was 8, my parents and I moved to the U.S., and ours became the typical immigrant narrative. My parents cleaned hotel rooms and washed dishes and pumped gas so that I could pursue my dream. Well, eventually I learned enough English.
And in Baltimore she was really known for having innovative policies. One of the things I knew her for best at the time was she wrote a blanket prescription for the entire city for naloxone, this opioid overdose reversal drug, and that was seen as something different and big.
Dr. Wen said so far 531 people have been saved from an overdose with naloxone. Dr. Wen said people with substance abuse problems deserve compassion and respect, and it is important to provide the public with the skills to use naloxone to save lives.
— from a background that is purely politics. Her mother is Ann Richards, the former governor of Texas, outspoken abortion advocate. Cecile worked on the Hill for Nancy Pelosi before taking her position with Planned Parenthood.
Democrats are ready to sit down and negotiate with Republicans right now, but it should be over legitimate issues, like how much do we invest in education, job training and infrastructure, not unrelated ideological issues like Planned Parenthood.
And it’s just five days after Justice Kavanaugh’s confirmation hearings, hearings that focus really heavily on the future of abortion rights — that’s when you have Dr. Leana Wen announced as the new president of Planned Parenthood.
It starts off pretty rocky and not necessarily in ways that relate to abortion. There’s this one incident that came up a lot in the reporting my colleague Shane Goldmacher and I were doing where Dr. Wen, on her first day as Planned Parenthood president, she had this interview run in the magazine Elle where she talks about her history and her excitement about being president of Planned Parenthood, and one of the things she does there is describe undocumented workers as illegal immigrants. This upset some people at Planned Parenthood. At a progressive organization, they kind of reject the idea that anyone could be illegal. And it comes up in a staff meeting that happens a few months later, where a young worker kind of confronts Dr. Wen about it, says, this makes it hard for me to organize. We serve people who are undocumented. I prefer if you didn’t use that language. And according to our reporting, she essentially says, I’m not going to apologize for that. So really early on, you’re starting to see these signs of tension between Dr. Wen and the organization she has just started running. You also start seeing some tension around things that are related to abortion and are related to Planned Parenthood’s role as an abortion provider. One of these is a debate about the Planned Parenthood website. Very early on, Dr. Wen suggests adding a bunch of new pages, health information pages, to the main Planned Parenthood website. These would be about things like the common cold, smoking, diabetes, emergency preparedness, not really what you think of when you think of Planned Parenthood. And I ended up seeing some internal emails where this starts to worry the Planned Parenthood staff. They start saying, wait a minute. Why does Planned Parenthood, when we typically don’t treat the common cold, why would we have information about this on our website? And there’s one email that kind of puts the question bluntly, where a Planned Parenthood staff member writes, “Are we the nation’s largest sexual and reproductive health provider, or are we something different?”
Yes, and they start to leave. So you start seeing some pretty senior folks, folks who had worked on political organizing for Planned Parenthood, leave the organization. Meanwhile, you’re starting to see this wave of really restrictive abortion bans that start very early in pregnancy.
So there is an expectation they are going to fight for their lives. They are fighting for their clinics’ ability to exist in the United States, and there are campaigns. Dr. Wen is on television talking about abortion rights.
This is not a warning. It’s not a drill. It’s not hypothetical. We could face a situation tomorrow where 1.1 million women of reproductive age in Missouri will no longer be able to access abortion care, which is essential health care, in their own state, and have to drive hundreds of miles round to Kansas, to Illinois, just to get health care. And I think it needs to be said that this is a real public health crisis.
But there’s a sense in the community that it’s not enough. When you look at, for example, the keynote that Dr. Wen gave at Planned Parenthood’s annual conference, it was about expanding into new health care services. It was talking about we’re going to help treat the opioid epidemic, and we’re going to help fight for more mental health coverage. And I don’t think folks at Planned Parenthood necessarily oppose treating opioid addiction and oppose treating mental health issues, but they felt like at this particular moment, the thing we need to focus on is making sure that we have clinics where we can do those things, and we are dangerously close to losing those clinics.
And you see this in a lot of the work she did. One of the first major campaigns they run is called “This Is Health Care.” Her vision for Planned Parenthood success is that they’re going to talk about all the different services they do. They are going to find common ground with people who might not support abortion rights but support access to birth control, and in that way, they’re going to chart this path to success where they’re less frequently the subject of the political attacks they’ve been facing relentlessly for the past decade. She has this kind of theory of the case that if we depoliticize Planned Parenthood, if we make it clear that this is a health care issue, not a political issue, that the attacks will lessen, that common ground will be found, and that Planned Parenthood will have a more successful long-term trajectory.
Right, and this is where a lot of longtime Planned Parenthood staff members clashed with her. They had this view that as long as we are an abortion provider, we’re going to be stuck in this political controversy. Depoliticization doesn’t seem to be an option right now. I think back to an interview I did with Mike Pence in 2011, where he said, as long as Planned Parenthood is doing abortions, I am going to be after them. So there’s this core fight over whether you even can depoliticize Planned Parenthood if they are committed to being an abortion provider and being the largest abortion provider in the United States. So from folks who had kind of been in the trenches of this debate for the past decade, they felt like this vision of just talking about it differently wasn’t going to solve the problem. It could actually be quite risky. If they are not out defending themselves day after day, they might lose the ground that they have right now instead of gaining the new ground that Dr. Wen wants.
So this really comes to a head about a month ago. These issues have been simmering, and they’re getting worse. There’s frustration among the staff. More and more people are leaving. News outlets are starting to report on the fact that there’s tension at Planned Parenthood. And in mid-June, Dr. Wen is essentially asked to resign from the organization. And there’s about a month of negotiations around how it’s going to happen, a desire to have an amicable parting, but that breaks down last week. Last week, in very quick succession, there is a meeting of the board where they vote to fire her. My colleague Shane Goldmacher reports that Leana Wen has been fired. She posts a statement on Twitter attacking Planned Parenthood.
Wen said those philosophical differences about the future of the organization are why she was fired, writing, “I came to Planned Parenthood to run a national health care organization and to advocate for the broad range of public health policies that affect our patients’ health. However, the new board leadership has determined that the priority of Planned Parenthood moving forward is to double down on abortion rights advocacy.”
Sarah, is this an example of Planned Parenthood not knowing who they were hiring when they bet on this doctor, this health care professional with this holistic vision, or is it they didn’t understand the depth of the threats against them at the time that they hired her?
I think it’s a mix of both of those. I don’t think they understood until Dr. Wen was actually there leading the organization the difference in the visions that they had. Nobody hires a new chief executive for an organization hoping that they will leave eight months later. They clearly thought Dr. Wen was going to be a successful leader. And that being said, it seems clear in retrospect she was not the right leader for the organization. That fact was probably forced out in the open earlier than it might have been in a different year because of this intense political battle that’s happening.
From everything you’re saying, it feels like Dr. Wen’s departure is a kind of win for abortion rights advocates in this moment, but I wonder if another way of thinking about it is that it’s also a win for opponents of abortion rights, because those opponents want Planned Parenthood to just be an abortion provider and an abortion rights advocate and nothing more, and the group just rejected a vision for making it about something much more.
Make no mistake. Today’s happenings show that Planned Parenthood is a political machine, that their bottom line is about abortion. It’s not about health care. And Leana Wen’s quick departure after less than a year of heading up Planned Parenthood just underscores the fact that this is a political organization.
You would think that Planned Parenthood would say, hey, let’s take it easy, especially in this political election season. No. Instead, they’re saying, our president — our president, meaning the president of Planned Parenthood — is not radical enough. She just wasn’t radical enough.
Earlier today, I talked to one of the folks who left Planned Parenthood, and she was saying, I would love to live in a world where we don’t talk about the politics of abortion. That is the place I want to be. I want to be where Dr. Wen is right now and talking about all the great health care services that we provide, but we’re just not there right now. We do the politics out of necessity. We combat the attacks to keep our clinics open. They want to live in the world that Dr. Leana Wen has outlined, but right now, they can’t.
To replace Dr. Wen, Planned Parenthood has named an acting president, Alexis Johnson. In a statement, the group described Johnson as, quote, “a renowned social justice leader, lifelong political organizer and a tireless advocate for reproductive rights and access to quality, affordable health care.”
The protests were prompted by hundreds of leaked text messages that captured the cozy relationship between the governor, Ricardo Rosselló, and special interests, and showed him mocking his own citizens.
The deal would boost military spending, as the president wants, and increase domestic spending, as congressional Democrats want, but it has angered Republicans by failing to reduce government spending.
Early in her tenure, for instance, Dr. Wen directed her staff to add new pages to the Planned Parenthood website about topics like asthma and the common cold — conditions that its clinics do not typically treat. One of her first major campaigns was simply called “This is health care.”
But as states began to pass ever more restrictive laws on abortion, and with the addition of a conservative justice to the Supreme Court — endangering Roe v. Wade — Planned Parenthood’s leaders felt they needed a more politically invested advocate in the battle over abortion access, according to people familiar with the matter.
The internal turmoil underscores one of the group’s central tensions: Is it a political organization or a health organization first? And can it be both at a time when abortion has been elevated to a prominent and incendiary issue in the 2020 presidential election — and where a middle ground has all but disappeared?
“Planned Parenthood occupies a unique position as both a health care provider and an advocate, which nobody else needs to do,” said Jess McIntosh, a Democratic strategist who has consulted with reproductive rights groups including Naral and Emily’s List. “Because they have such an outsized share of market attention, they don’t have the luxury of letting go of the advocacy piece.”
Interviews with nearly a dozen current and former employees and officials — who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal matters — portrayed Dr. Wen as a leader viewed by many as a poor manager, perhaps unprepared to lead a nationwide organization with more than 600 health centers. Some employees chafed at a handbook for special assistants that circulated after she arrived, which featured one top bullet point reading, “All emails from Dr. Wen sent the night before should be answered immediately before anything else is done.”
Dr. Wen's departure throws Planned Parenthood, the nation’s leading women’s health organization, into a state of uncertainty. Some of Planned Parenthood’s most senior and experienced political hands had departed during Dr. Wen’s brief tenure, and on Tuesday five of her top lieutenants whom she had brought in were fired. There were fears of lawsuits to come.
Through an associate, Dr. Wen has declined to be interviewed. In a statement Tuesday, she said she was leaving because of philosophical differences and hinted at her preference for viewing the organization through the prism of public health.
Many strategists who work with abortion rights activists believe Planned Parenthood was caught off guard and ill prepared to deal with the recent attacks from President Trump and Republicans, who spread misinformation about Democratic-led efforts in states like New York to expand abortion access later in pregnancy. Instead of aggressively refuting the claims that Democrats were legalizing “infanticide,” Planned Parenthood and other abortion rights groups were slow to form a cohesive and effective response.
In an interview with The New York Times in May, Dr. Wen acknowledged that the slowness to respond hurt their cause. “Sometimes there is a temptation to let the absurdity stand on its own, but we have to recognize that this is a different time,” she said.
According to people who worked with her, Dr. Wen pushed for changes that some employees felt were not in sync with the sensibilities of a progressive organization like Planned Parenthood. One current employee said people chafed at having years of work on “the future of abortion access” suddenly replaced with different priorities.
Dr. Wen’s public comments also caused some frustration internally, the current and former officials said. In late May, the Washington Post Fact Checker column wrote an article about her repeated claim that “thousands of women died every year pre-Roe” from a lack of legal abortion care. The column rated her statement as “false,” something a former employee said she had been told repeatedly by her staff but disregarded.
Other, newer employees, however, described a positive working relationship with Dr. Wen. One recalled a standing ovation she received when she spoke at the group’s national meeting in the spring. These employees, who also spoke anonymously to discuss internal matters, felt that the organization’s leadership was resistant to Dr. Wen’s vision for providing additional services such as mental health and substance abuse resources, seeing this type of treatment as “mission creep.”
Planned Parenthood allies had already come under attack in 2015 for suggesting that the organization provides mammogram screenings, which it does not (the organization refers people to other providers for the service). Staff members worried that Dr. Wen’s request could lead to a similar controversy.
One email from a Planned Parenthood employee, viewed by The New York Times, warned that the new pages would be “risky for the brand” because it often “gets dinged in the press when we suggest that we provide services we don’t.”
The handbook that was distributed to some employees — a 177-page manual titled the “Special Assistant Guide,” created when Dr. Wen served as Baltimore’s health commissioner — also generated skepticism. The manual, first reported by Buzzfeed, includes instructions like “Write everything Dr. Wen indicates she needs down, including for herself” and “Try not to look at emails more than once.”
The request set off intense negotiations involving lawyers on both sides over the terms of her departure. Her exit was assured; the one question was whether it would be done peacefully and quietly, or loudly and acrimoniously.
On July 10, the board issued a notice for an emergency meeting on July 16 at which time Dr. Wen would be terminated. The board did not inform her of the meeting, according to a person close to her, though she found out soon afterward.
On Tuesday, the board voted unanimously for her replacement, the board member Alexis McGill Johnson. Lawyers continued to negotiate Dr. Wen’s departure, but talks collapsed in the later afternoon. After the news broke, Dr. Wen accused Planned Parenthood of engineering her ouster in a “secret” meeting.
