Mark Thoma has the rundown of informed reactions. A bailout was necessary — but this bailout is an outrage: a lousy deal for the taxpayers, no accountability for management, and just to make things perfect, quite possibly inadequate, so that Citi will be back for more.
Great. Nothing like throwing good money after bad. One question to which I have no answer: How long do we go down this rabbit hole before the Treasury is bankrupt? What’s the scenario for that? I’m concerned that when we need money for unemployment, etc., the war chest will be empty.
The Fed has to standby a commercial bank like Citi to maintain its credibility. There will be global ramification if Citi (too big) is to fail. Saving Citi is different from saving Lehman as the Fed had no obligations toward an investment bank.
HOWEVER, do we allow inept management to continue? We save the system and critical component of that system like Citi but not the mangement. There should be a condition that the incompetent move out for the competent to take over.
The credibility of the Fed and Treasury is at stake as they are seen saving the old Wall Street crowd. (Note that Bob Rubin and Bill Rhodes are on Citi’s Board and have been around before the tsunami).
Another question — the Treasury has used nearly $300B of the original $350B bailout money, leaving about $50B. They haven’t even asked for the 2nd $350B. So, where are they getting the authority to guarantee another $280B just for one bank?
1. If the taxpayers are putting $20b into a company that had a market cap of less than $21b on Friday, shouldn’t we be getting almost as many shares as are already outstanding, thus owning about 49% of the company?
I suggest otherwise, given Treasury Secretary designate Geither’s involvement (through his position at the NY Fed) with the Bear and AIG bailouts, and the Democratic Congress’ endorsement of the TARP. Both of these schemes have the same features of hasty construction, poor transparency, and inadequate taxpayer protection that we find in the Citi bailout.
Dr Krugman, we are in a significant crisis and you are one of our sharpest minds. Please save this space for honest critiques and clear descriptions of the predicament. The usual political game “pin the blame” isn’t getting us closer to a (probably very painful) resolution. We need both parties to better define the terms and conditions of their rescue efforts, and more importantly, the limits of those efforts.
Right you are starting with the lousy 8% on the preferred with that kind of risk baked in? No change in management. No board seats unless they miss a payment. No haircut to the holders of common (save for loss of dividend), or preferred or the bondholders. And not enough to really ‘cure’ their problems in the long term.
I would be interested in having Mr. Krugman explain why the deal is “lousy”. I am also concerned, as an avid Obama supporter, by the appearance that the Citi deal is being put together by Robert Rubin and his proteges, with more than merely the appearance of a conflct of interest. How will Obama avoid the claim that his principal staff is weighed down by special interests if Robert Rubin is representing him at the table and representing his own personal interests in Citi at the same time?
Miguel, I couldn’t agree more with your comment. I would also add Mr. Rubin’s role in Citi’s debacle, by encouraging Citi to take greater trading risks (see the article on Sunday NYT for more details). Robert Rubin is one of the main economic advisors in Obama’s transition team.
Those of you who read “The Education of David Stockman” will remember that the doctrine of Reaganomics was a “Trojan Horse”, i.e., a smokescreen for an agenda whose real purpose was to bankrupt the Federal government. The Bush people are trying to finish the job once and for all. It’s that simple.
I thought Obama’s election would be a fresh start with new economic thinkers. But here we have Obama’s choice for Treasury Secretary as the architect of the Citi deal. When will we get some sanity? Dr. Krugman have you been approached by Obama’s “people”?
I also do not understand why these people are not being sued. PBS program NOW did an excellent job explaining the deliberate malfeasance, in this case, of the rating agencies. The truth is, these banks knew exactly what they were doing and they didn’t care as long as they made gobs of money. Bank officers are on tape saying they deliberately made bad loans. They should be held accountable in court.
You are ridiculous. Like Barney Frank doesn’t want this? Like Obama won’t want these things? You act like none of the Democrats want this stuff. They are just as bad. You lose all credibility when you turn this into a partisan thing. Both parties want this, and they both stink.
There was a brief statement this morning somewhere on television that Bush talked this over with Obama. That left me with the question of whether talking it over with Obama meant, or merely implied, Obama agreed with the deal.
