According to the latest Fortune 500 list, released last week, the seventh-largest company headquartered in New York City is not Goldman Sachs or Morgan Stanley. Those two global investment banks rank behind an up and comer known as INTL FCStone.
FCStone is not the newest giant to stride down Wall Street. It is a fairly obscure commodities-trading outfit that has been “growing like crazy” and gobbling up other small firms, said its chief executive, Sean O’Connor.
Still, Mr. O’Connor would be the first to admit that the company’s ranking on the annual Fortune list is a mirage. FCStone has no business appearing between MetLife and Goldman, ranked 51st among all public companies in America. It has fewer than 150 employees in New York City and until last year, its home base was identified as Altamonte Springs, Fla., a suburb of Orlando. (Even so, the company is not above describing itself as a Fortune 500 company prominently on its Web site.)
The reason for the high ranking is a quirk of accounting rules, Mr. O’Connor said. The company buys and sells gold and other commodities for its clients, often to hedge against fluctuations in the prices of materials they use in their operations, he said. Under generally accepted accounting principles, whatever FCStone receives when it resells those commodities counts as revenue.
Fortune ranks companies based on revenue, not profit. So, even though FCStone reported net income last year of just $5.4 million — less than Goldman earned before lunch on a bad day — it was credited with nearly $47 billion in revenue.
“That is how Fortune thinks about life and how the accounting world thinks about life, but it’s not how we think about ourselves,” Mr. O’Connor said. He added that business has been brisk as the prices of almost all commodities, including oil, metals and grains, have been rising. “It’s hard to think of one that’s going the other way — other than the dollar,” he said.
New York Today is still going strong! Though no longer on City Room, New York Today continues to appear every weekday morning, offering a roundup of news and events for the city. You can find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com or in the morning, on The New York Times homepage or its New York section. You can also receive it via email.
Metropolitan Diary continues to publish! Since 1976, Metropolitan Diary has been a place for New Yorkers, past and present, to share odd fleeting moments in the city. We will continue to publish one item each weekday morning and a round-up in Monday's print edition. You can find the latest entries at nytimes.com/diary and on our New York section online.
