CVS Caremark said after the market closed on Tuesday that it planned to acquire a rival, Longs Drug Stores, for $2.9 billion in cash through a tender offer, a move meant to bolster the pharmacy giant’s presence in the West and Hawaii.
Longs has 521 stores in Arizona, California, Hawaii and Nevada, and also owns Rx America, a prescription benefits manager with more than eight million members. CVS Caremark said the deal would add to its current presence in Southern California.
Among the attractions of the merger, according to CVS Caremark, is that Longs owns the real estate tied to some facilities, including 200 stores. CVS Caremark, which conservatively values the store real estate at about $1 billion, suggested that it may undertake actions like a sale-and-leaseback as another way to generate cash.
Longs is also expected to help bolster CVS Caremark’s drug benefits business, an important field and one that is seeing increased competition from the likes of Wal-Mart Stores. CVS bought Caremark last year to create a giant in both the pharmacy and prescriptions services sectors.
The deal, which is expected to close in the fourth quarter, will be financed through a $1.5 billion bridge loan to be provided by Lehman Brothers and Deutsche Bank, in a continued sign that deal financing is still available for corporate buyers.
Lehman Brothers and Deutsche Bank worked as CVS’s financial advisers and provided its bridge financing, while Davis Polk & Wardwell and Mintz Levin Cohn Ferris Glovsky and Popeo provided legal advice.
J.P. Morgan, led by former Bear Stearns M&A chief Charles Edelman, worked as Longs’ financial adviser. A Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz team comprising Edward Herlihy, David Shaprio, Jeannemarie O’Brien, Joe Larson and Joshua Holmes gave legal advice.
I am not so sure how these retailers make their money and how they may cushion and pump up some of their earnings. CVS had serious accounting issues a few years ago and has always seemed to have optics and sizzle that were not necessarily reflective of the underlying business.
With plans like Medco and others out there and other distributors including the big-box retailers providing real competition in bulk candy, HBA and other discressionary items as well as pharms, I question who brings in the consumer dollar in a recession and believe it more likely to be Costco, BJ’s, Sam’s Club and WalMart and very possibly the local small guy with some level of loyalty and real service not just advertised smiley faces and “88 cent” candy. The newer bonus point programs are a nuisance at best.
The reason CVS, Walgreens, and others is that their physical presence is small, are easy to get in and out of quickly, and have 85% of what one needs when looking for an convenience item. When I’m out and about I avoid Costco just because it’s a real pain and takes me 3 times as long to get what is needed.
Additionally, I have noticed CVS has located in downtown metro areas as well as the suburbs and an many more locations that would be a big box retailer. It’s easier to find a CVS or Walgreens for something quick rather than driving way out of my way to save a buck, especially with fuel prices being higher.
Mr. Bryant why was this such a good deal for Longs??? It appears to be only a good deal to the ones that control many shares of Longs stock, like you…. Also, according to a recent article the land value of various Longs sites are worth over 1 billion. Why didn’t you and the Board leverage those holdings and expand the company or maybe close some under performing stores??? Or maybe because your 5 year contract is coming to a close!!!!!
this is a win win, since it gives CVs a market penetration it would have otherwise taken them at least 7-10 years to win on their own. The 8m lives they get from the Rx PBM sub is icing on the cake and will fit in smoothly into CVS’ already 1.2B prescriptions/year “best of” model……and contrary to what the article mentions, the retail end of these businesses is doing TOO poorly – in fact, we’ve seen decent SSS comps come from all 3: CVS, WAG, RAD
