Executives of the company, a mutual insurance concern formally owned by its policyholders, had been debating the structure of the company since this summer, when the New York Legislature rejected a hybrid corporate form. New York Life had advocated the hybrid, which would have allowed the sale of stock while the company remained under the technical control of policyholders.
The other leading advocate of the hybrid structure, the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, announced in November that it was converting to public ownership, so Bill Werfelman, a New York Life spokesman, said the company ''felt it was important to let people know what we were going to do.''
Several analysts said they believed one reason for the decision not to go public was that New York Life -- which, by some calculations, has been reporting below industry returns on capital -- was concerned it might be taken over or be forced by investors to reorganize. Under the hybrid structure, a takeover would have been impossible.
''There's no question that a powerful, strong company like New York Life with the cash flow it has, its market position and distribution system would be a very interesting candidate for a company that might want to have a strong position in the life industry,'' said Sy Sternberg, New York Life's chief executive, in an interview yesterday from San Francisco where his board was meeting.
But he said the main reasons he recommended to the board that the company's structure remain unchanged, and won its unanimous endorsement in a vote Monday morning, was that he believes in the mutual concept. That allows policyholders to receive dividends that reduce the cost of their coverage and have a stake in the company. He also believes that New York Life has enough cash -- at least $3 billion -- to carry out its acquisition plans.
Other big mutual insurers that are shifting to public ownership besides Metropolitan -- the Prudential Insurance Company of America and the John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance, for example -- have said they are doing so to have shares that they can use to buy other companies, thus gaining market share and economies of scale.
Though Mr. Sternberg spoke of ''an intangible value'' in mutual ownership, many in the insurance business say there seems to be little practical distinction these days for policyholders between mutual and shareholder companies. Because of competitive pressures, they say, prices for coverage are very similar.
Many in the industry consider it inevitable that mutual companies shift to public ownership. And some analysts said they believed Mr. Sternberg might simply be postponing such a change to give himself breathing room to increase New York Life's returns, which would lead to a higher stock price should it go public, and provide protection against unwanted changes.
Duff & Phelps in Chicago said that New York Life had been reporting returns below the 5.9 percent average of all mutual life insurers. Mr. Sternberg said his company's returns had been slightly above average. But they were still well below Duff & Phelps's calculated average return of 12.5 percent for publicly held life insurance companies.
''If your return on capital is mediocre, it makes no sense to convert to a shareholder-based ownership because it opens you up to the possibility that someone will come in and buy up your stock at a depressed price and force management changes,'' said Cathy Seifert, an analyst for the equity research group at Standard & Poor's.
Another prospect, she said, is that an efficient competitor would buy the company outright, sensing a bargain in the low stock price and expecting to transfer the efficiency of his company to the one being acquired.
None of the recently converted mutual companies have been taken over. But the field of potential buyers may increase sharply. Mr. Sternberg noted that Congress was once again considering the elimination of Depression-era restrictions that would permit ''a bank, a securities firm or one of the larger global companies'' to buy an insurance company.
