Their blue and white habits glowing against the gray sky, the Sisters of Life radiated joy outside St. Patrick's Cathedral yesterday. While the initial news about John Cardinal O'Connor had seemed grim -- a tumor on his brain -- subsequent word had been more uplifting. The tumor was confined to the brain's surface; the Cardinal was home from the hospital and might be at St. Patrick's to greet them.
For the 47 nuns of the order, the Cardinal's well-being is a deeply personal subject, because in 1991 he started their religious community, which is dedicated to defending human life. Now, Mother Agnes Mary, the order's Superior General, said, he has become one with those he had always worked to protect.
''The Cardinal and his message are all about the dignity of each human person -- the born and the unborn, the chronically ill, the elderly and the frail,'' she said. ''Now I'm sure he has a unique solidarity with those threatened by illness.''
Across the city yesterday, the Cardinal's health was pondered and prayed over, his name added to the list of the sick at countless churches. The powerful feelings prompted by the intimations of his mortality reflected the indelible impression he has made on Catholic, and civic, life in the city.
''Personally, I was very close to him and he is very humorous, and I feel saddened,'' Lumen G. Castaneda, 64, said at the Church of St. Brendan in the Norwood section of the Bronx. She is a lector there, as well as the Filipino parish leader.
She said she became very close to the Cardinal last year, when he helped the Filipino Apostolate open the Pastoral Center, the four-story home of the Filipino Roman Catholic congregations in New York, on 62d Street, between Second and Third Avenues.
''I do pray to God he will be spared many more years,'' Ms. Castaneda said. ''We were getting used to the fact that he was retiring this year'' -- the Cardinal turns 80 in January -- ''but he still wanted to serve the people of New York. But with this, I think he'll be retiring.''
But the Cardinal, while secluded at his home on Madison Avenue at 51st Street behind St. Patrick's, took pains yesterday to make clear that he is anything but retired. His office issued a statement, which was read at St. Patrick's by the Rev. Michael Tavuzzi, the celebrant of the Mass usually offered by the Cardinal, that concluded:
''The Cardinal has great and hopeful anticipation for the future and as has always been the case, expects to serve as the Archbishop of New York at the pleasure of our Holy Father, Pope John Paul II. He is in no hurry to leave office nor is he in any hurry to reduce his workload once he has completed the recuperative period.''
A statement on the Cardinal's condition issued by Mr. Zwilling on Saturday night did not say when or by whom the operation had been performed, and gave no details about the precise size, location or nature of the tumor, or the medical prognosis. Mr. Zwilling said he could not release any more medical information about the tumor or the operation.
Some parishioners around the city expressed anger that the Cardinal's condition had been shrouded in mystery. Until Saturday, the archdiocese had given the impression that he was at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center only for tests.
''He radiates confidence, even in this time of his illness,'' said Susan Varenne, 57, a public high school teacher who has been a member of the Corpus Christi Church on West 121st Street for 30 years. ''There are a lot of people worse off than him and they need this kind of example.''
His strength in facing illness corresponded to the strength he has shown in defending his positions. For New York, and beyond, the Cardinal has established himself as a leader who stands up for what he believes -- particularly on issues like abortion and homosexuality -- regardless of which way the prevailing winds blow.
''He's not only a saintly man -- he's a manly saint,'' Pro-Life Anderson, who legally changed his name to reflect his anti-abortion views, said on his way to Mass at St. Patrick's. ''He doesn't hem and haw around,'' Mr. Anderson, 71, who is from Savannah, Ga., said.
At Holy Cross Church on West 42d Street, Diana Corto, 45, agreed. ''His views have sometimes been controversial, but he is a man who spoke up for what he believed was true,'' Ms. Corto, a singer and opera producer, said. ''He tried to uphold the moral standards of the church even in the face of criticism.
''In New York City, there is a popular set of values put forth by the cultural left,'' Mr. Montgomery said. ''Cardinal O'Connor has been very courageous in his beliefs. He does not care about being a popular man.''
Monsignor Patrick J. Boyle, 59, the pastor at St. Brendan's and the vicar of the northwest Bronx, said that the Cardinal had shown ''remarkable'' friendship to the city's priests. ''Popular opinion has it that the church is very autocratic,'' Monsignor Boyle said. ''I don't think that's true of Cardinal O'Connor. He genuinely listens to what people have to say, and he may not alter his opinions about the major teachings of the church, but he's willing to be truly advised, and to work toward the common good.''
Monsignor Boyle noted that the Cardinal had always shown extraordinary vigor, and would probably maintain a presence even while undergoing radiation therapy. But he added a reminder that no matter how strong Cardinal O'Connor's presence, the church is no place for a cult of personality.
