It began, like so many modern presidential campaign stories do, as a joke. Sarah Marilyn, a 28-year-old Brooklyn social media strategist, didn’t bother to watch the first Democratic debates in June. She was only vaguely aware that they were happening until the memes began cascading onto her phone. She chased the best jokes, fell into a kind of Photoshop fugue state, and emerged as the co-founder of a Facebook page dedicated to the candidate with the most stimulating content: Marianne Williamson’s Dank Meme Stash.
It took only a few hours for her ironic interest to bloom into something more. Was it just her, or was Marianne Williamson actually kind of making sense? Somebody tweeted that “Marianne Williamson just needs 2 or 3 hot Bushwick witch girls to run her social media and she will absolutely run away with this,” and Marilyn decided that she would be one of them.
As Marilyn waded into the campaign, she met resistance from Williamson’s old-school supporters, the kind of people who sincerely seek her spiritual self-help content. When Marilyn shared a meme featuring the candidate in a meditative pose that said “Re-Align America’s Chakras Again,” somebody called her a “hater.” Others worried that mocking memes would undermine Williamson’s claim to a serious run. Williamson herself seemed a little spooked. “I am not a cult leader,” she clarified on Twitter. “Why do people make crystal jokes?” she pleaded to The New York Times. “I don’t use crystals!”
In a modern campaign, unseriousness can be a virtue. We are living in a time when two meme-literate teenage boys are directing the campaign of an 89-year-old former senator. They are the political equivalent of children stacked in a trench coat, angling to buy a ticket to the presidential race. And they are riffing, really, on the example set by Trump himself: that joke candidacies can be laced with serious potential.
In Marilyn’s Bushwick apartment in August, we spoke about the proximity she sees between Williamson and Trump. “Both of them are talking to people who don’t take politics very seriously,” she said. These political cynics “think the whole system is corrupt,” she added. “The only way they’re going to engage is if it’s not going to take serious energy from their souls.”
THERE’S A PERSISTENT MEME format known as the expanding brain meme that depicts a human brain growing in size and strength until it is so intellectually powerful that mind lasers blast from its skull. Somebody crafted a version of it that perfectly articulates Marilyn’s position: The most intellectually evolved stance in the 2020 election — the laser-brain one — is to support Williamson both ironically and unironically. Perhaps the giddy feeling of memeing could translate into the grass-roots energy necessary to lift a guru to the White House. I mean, has anything Joe Biden has ever said supplied the natural high produced by grafting Williamson’s face into a scene of the Na’vi people of “Avatar?” All Marilyn knew is that she had never been so excited about politics.
Within a month, she was juggling 20 meme pages and managing online efforts across the chat service Discord, the livestreaming platform Twitch, Facebook, Twitter, Reddit and Instagram, plus a candy-colored central hub, OrbGang.love. She helped leverage the crystal ball emoji to inject Williamson’s ethereal vibe into the wonky discourse, calling Williamson her #OrbMom and the movement the #OrbGang (styled after the #YangGang, for fans of Andrew Yang). Posters on her pages often addressed their messages to either “ironic supporters” or “unironic supporters,” but increasingly that was a distinction without a difference. “Thanks to this group,” one supporter wrote on Marianne Williamson’s Dank Meme Stash, “I would now for real vote for Marianne Williamson.”
When the second debate came around, in July, Marilyn attended a watch party in Manhattan. I descended into a basement to find it stuffed with a diverse array of her fellow travelers. There were younger men in tank tops and older ones in suspenders. One woman clutched Nancy Pelosi’s memoir and another wore a fez, which she was very much pulling off. A guy in a Dallas Cowboys hat and river sandals engaged me in a crossed-arm double handshake and said, “We’ve closed the energy circle.”
We did not see much of Marianne Williamson that night. Long shot candidates with more traditional qualifications — John Delaney, Tim Ryan — crowded out the margins of the televised debate. But the real action was not happening on CNN. As Beto O’Rourke droned on about his “administration” on TV, Marilyn stared into her phone, its glow revealing her beatific smile as she thumbed out tweets like “My spicy orb mom there is no other but you.” A few incisive political points (Williamson’s speech advocating reparations) and aesthetic quirks (she dropped a “yadda, yadda, yadda”) would be enough to sustain the #OrbGang for weeks.
By the end of the evening, Williamson had become the most-searched-for candidate on Google in every state except Montana. When she walked off the stage, a reporter asked her to rate her performance and she replied, “I’ll tell you later when I see the memes.” Soon she would share one on her Instagram: her face Photoshopped into “Game of Thrones,” with Williamson styled as Melisandre, a priestess who is secretly very old and works blood magic in the service of her god, the Lord of Light.
The next morning, Marilyn texted me a link to a Twitch stream where #OrbGang members crowdsourced fresh memes. The Williamson memers run a shadow campaign, discussing strategy, philosophy and psychology. The day after the debate, they were capitalizing on a report from The Hill newspaper that claimed they were organizing an “occult task force” of “chaos magicians, witches and energy workers.”
It was the kind of straight-faced reporting of manifest absurdity that creates a richly ambivalent environment for memes to thrive. A supporter began assembling an “Orbgang Chaos Magician Starter Pack” on Photoshop featuring occult objects. “I’d recommend a classical painting of witches,” someone advised over chat. “Or possibly the Goya painting of the seance with the goat devil.”
IRONIC OR NOT, all the meme energy behind Williamson’s campaign was not strong enough to propel her into the third Democratic debate. But Williamson’s fans are undeterred. “We will be orbing/meme-ing Marianne into the debate coverage,” Marilyn wrote in an email to supporters.
Or to put it in the language of Marianne memes: They will astrally project her onto that stage. Soon, Williamson had announced that she would hold her own kind of shadow debate: a “What I Would Have Said Had I Been There” livestream. Marilyn is stockpiling memes in anticipation.
Williamson may not be our next president, but this kind of half-parodic campaign — in which disengaged voters proficient in memes plumb the psychic undercurrents of the American electorate to forge an ambivalent relationship with the candidate’s official efforts — may just be our future. After all, as Marilyn puts it: “Ironic votes are just votes.”
