At every turn, there was another show celebrating on Sunday night. The cast of “Game of Thrones” convened for one last time to toast another win for best drama, its Emmy record-tying fourth victory in the category. John Oliver’s “Last Week Tonight” overwhelmed his late-night competition to win best talk show for a fourth straight year. “Chernobyl,” HBO’s unexpected gem of a limited series about the 1986 nuclear reactor disaster, took home best limited series. And the network topped Netflix for most Emmy wins over all, reclaiming sole bragging rights after tying with the streaming service last year.
With fierce competition from the likes of Netflix, Disney and Apple and a relatively new parent company with no track record in entertainment, can it possibly maintain the hegemony it has held over the television industry for so long?
“That’s a narrative I don’t subscribe to,” he said. “We invested more money in HBO because we believe it’s a mainstay cornerstone of what we’re doing going forward. It’s going to be critical to the service. Our commitment this year, our commitment next year, is going to continue to demonstrate that.”
Still, “Game of Thrones” and “Veep” are both off the air. Many of HBO’s top executives, including its chief executive, Richard Plepler, have left in the last year. The top producers for “Game of Thrones,” David Benioff and Dan Weiss, the last people to give a speech from the Emmys stage on Sunday night, are leaving, too. They signed a nine-figure deal last month to go to Netflix.
There are other issues. Warner Media has a streaming app, HBO Max, that will enter the marketplace next year with a monthly price — at least $15 — more than double what competing services from Disney, Apple and others will cost.
Then there’s the drama surrounding HBO and Warner Media’s parent company, AT&T. This month, the investor Elliott Management issued a blistering 24-page report that was critical of the “alarming executive turnover” at Warner Media and questioned the company’s foray into the entertainment space. It does not help matters that AT&T also has $149 billion in net debt.
It was a boisterous, loud and sweaty affair at the Chateau Marmont. There was Jon Hamm accidentally stumbling into the photo booth area. Stephen Colbert, Jane Lynch and Amy Sherman-Palladino, the creator of “The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel,” made the rounds. The man responsible for the entire operation, Amazon’s chief executive, Jeff Bezos, was sequestered in a reserved corner of the party space. He stood with his son and a stream of well-wishers who needed permission from the two bodyguards manning the area to get through to shake his hand.
But he was not the star of the night. The ’90s hits blaring from the D.J. booth were no match for the applause that erupted when Phoebe Waller-Bridge, the star and creator of “Fleabag,” made her way into the party with her boyfriend, the writer-director Martin McDonagh, in tow. From the second she walked in, Ms. Waller-Bridge was so besieged by well-wishers that she could barely get a bite of food or even light her cigarette.
No wonder. “Fleabag” upset the HBO awards show juggernaut “Veep” for best comedy, and Ms. Waller-Bridge claimed three Emmys over all. She beat Julia Louis-Dreyfus to win best actress in a comedy, the first time in the show’s seven seasons that Ms. Louis-Dreyfus did not win.
Amazon has had the reputation in Hollywood for being a sleeping giant. It spends plenty and has seemingly infinite resources, but, despite the earlier success of shows like “Transparent,” its overall impact has been muted.
Now, between “The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel” and “Fleabag,” it has back-to-back Emmy comedy winners. And it is a sign that there are plenty of competitors — particularly from the tech world — ready to go toe to toe with HBO.
“I have the benefit of being here for 15 years, so I’ve heard this over and over again,” said Casey Bloys, HBO’s president of programming. “This is the world we live in, and our formula of curation and betting on people we believe in and doing the hard work, it pays off.
And the network has maintained its habit of finding more hits. Even without “Game of Thrones” and “Veep,” the cupboard is not bare. The second season of “Succession” has received a rapturous response from critics.
Next month, HBO will premiere “Watchmen,” an adaptation of the comic book series from Damon Lindelof, a co-creator of “The Leftovers.” In November, the network will debut “His Dark Materials,” based on the popular Philip Pullman books. There are also series from J. J. Abrams and the “Avengers” director Joss Whedon, as well as spinoff series from the “Game of Thrones” universe. And HBO has placed a series order for a comedy that will be produced by none other than Ms. Waller-Bridge, who will also have a recurring on-screen role.
“Obviously there’s a lot of competition,” Mr. Bloys said. “Clearly. It’s harder fought, and so it’s nice. It’s nice. I’m going to enjoy it for one night, and then tomorrow I’m going to go back to anxiety and all the things that come with it.”
