The service, called Peacock, is scheduled to make its mark in April with some 15,000 hours of content. The streaming service was being developed under the leadership of its chairwoman, Bonnie Hammer, who had previously served as the head of NBCUniversal Cable Entertainment, where she oversaw NBC’s cable channels.
Cut to the present. Ms. Hammer is no longer the head of Peacock. In her place, NBCUniversal has installed Matt Strauss, a longtime executive from NBCUniversal’s parent company, the telecommunications giant Comcast. Mr. Strauss was most recently the executive vice president of Comcast Cable’s digital arm, Xfinity Services. As part of the shake-up, Ms. Hammer has been named the head of NBCUniversal Content Studios, a newly created part of the company.
“Bonnie’s great taste, deep Hollywood relationships, and strong track record of generating popular and award-winning programming make her ideally suited to oversee this new division,” Mr. Burke said in a statement on Monday.
There were other moves, too. George Cheeks, a co-chairman of NBC Entertainment, was named vice chairman of NBCUniversal content studios. He will report to Ms. Hammer and continue to oversee late-night television at NBC.
With Mr. Cheeks vacating his previous post, Paul Telegdy becomes the sole chairman of NBC Entertainment and will have responsibility for programming decisions at NBC, the most-watched broadcast network.
Mr. Telegdy and Mr. Cheeks had shared responsibility for the home of “This Is Us” and “America’s Got Talent” since the departure 13 months ago of Robert Greenblatt, who led a ratings turnaround at NBC during his eight years in charge. In March, Mr. Greenblatt became the head of entertainment at Warner Media, the division of AT&T that is home to HBO, TNT and TBS.
In January, Mr. Burke announced several high-level executive changes, setting up a potential showdown for who could succeed him as chief executive. He named Mark Lazarus the head of most of NBC’s East Coast operations and gave Jeff Shell responsibility for NBCUniversal’s Hollywood properties in Burbank, Calif. Mr. Burke has denied that he has plans to leave his post any time soon.
Ms. Hammer’s move to streaming — away from her longtime home in cable — was part of that January announcement. The round of changes announced on Monday place her in control of the company’s television studios.
When Peacock makes its planned debut in April, it will join the growing list of new streaming services, including Apple TV Plus (Nov. 1), Disney Plus (Nov. 12) and HBO Max, which is also to start in April. The platforms will enter an increasingly competitive arena that already includes established services like Netflix, Hulu and Amazon Prime.
Peacock intends to draw from its vast library, streaming complete seasons of “Parks and Recreation,” “Cheers,” “Downton Abbey,” “Everybody Loves Raymond,” “Friday Night Lights” and “Frasier.” In June, NBCUniversal regained the rights to “The Office,” which has had a successful afterlife on Netflix. The show will become available on Peacock in 2021.
