The sale price would be at least $5.8 billion and could climb once an independent party assesses Hulu’s fair market value, the companies said. The potential payout is based on Hulu’s current $27.5 billion valuation (last month, it was valued at $15.8 billion).
Hulu had 28 million subscribers at the end of April, a 12 percent jump since the end of last year. Although it is expected to lose more than $1.5 billion in 2019, Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive, said he expected the service to reach 40 million subscribers and turn a profit by around 2024.
“Hulu represents the best of television, with its incredible array of award-winning original content,” Mr. Iger said in a statement on the deal. He added that the company planned to integrate the service into its business operations, and that its staff would probably be folded into Disney’s streaming and international division, led by Kevin Mayer.
Under the terms of the deal, Comcast, the owner of NBCUniversal, agreed to continue licensing its NBC shows to Hulu through 2024, with an option to pull its content after three years. The provision is potentially crucial to the future of Hulu, which began as a joint venture among broadcast networks and built its audience on shows from NBC, ABC and Fox.
Comcast could end up lowering its investment over the next few years if it decides to stop financing Hulu, but its stake will never fall below 21 percent, according to the deal’s terms. For now, Disney will probably take on all of Hulu’s losses.
Disney, which owns ABC, absorbed the bulk of Fox’s assets after it won a fierce bidding war against Comcast to acquire the majority of Rupert Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox entertainment empire. That acquisition put the continued availability of NBC shows on Hulu in doubt.
“The extension of the content-licensing agreement will generate significant cash flow for us,” he added, “while giving us maximum flexibility to program and distribute to our own direct-to-consumer platform.”
Hulu started as a free service in 2008 and was entirely supported by advertising. It later began charging subscription fees while offering a live television service similar to the bundles of pay TV channels offered by cable providers.
For much of Hulu’s existence, its complicated ownership arrangement, with a committee-led management team, occasionally hampered decision-making and the service’s overall mission. Was it a repository of network shows for next-day viewing, or did it want to compete more directly with the likes of Netflix? The answer was not always clear.
Netflix, with 148 million subscribers around the world, remains the leading streaming service. It has 60 million subscribers in the United States, more than double the number who pay for Hulu, which primarily serves an American audience.
But Hulu is growing faster than Netflix in the United States, and it has ambitions to expand internationally. Making a global push would require new rights agreements with content owners, including Comcast. In 2018, the cable giant acquired the British satellite TV service Sky, which has a growing streaming presence in Europe.
Disney became Hulu’s majority owner after formally completing the Fox deal in March. In April, Hulu agreed to buy back the 9.5 percent stake in the service that AT&T had taken on when it acquired Time Warner last year. Hulu’s acquisition of that smaller stake will be partly financed by Disney and Comcast.
Hulu has three products: the live service that replicates a cable bundle at $45 a month, an ad-free streaming service priced at $12 a month (this one acts most like Netflix) and a $6-a-month streaming service that includes commercials.
The $6 offering is Hulu’s most lucrative business. It generates more than $15 in revenue per subscriber each month, because it allows for targeted advertising, the high-cost commercials tailored to individual viewers. Its success suggests that NBCUniversal is on the right track with its plans for an ad-based streaming network.
Disney and Comcast announced the deal during the television industry’s annual upfront presentations, when the networks pitch their fall lineups to advertisers in New York. Hulu held its version this month at Madison Square Garden, with stars like Margot Robbie, Reese Witherspoon and George Clooney taking the stage.
“It’s been more than 10 years since my last upfronts,” Mr. Clooney, once a star of NBC’s “E.R.,” said to loud cheers. He was there to promote “Catch-22,” a new series based on the classic Joseph Heller novel.
Unlike commercial-free rivals like Netflix and Disney’s coming Disney Plus, Hulu has placed a big bet on advertising. Last year, it took in more than $1.5 billion in ad revenue, a 45 percent increase from the previous year. Randy Freer, Hulu’s chief executive, said he expected the ad market for online television to grow to $50 billion in the next three years.
“This uniquely positions Hulu to benefit from leading brands into the digital video ad market,” Mr. Freer said at Disney’s investor presentation last week. “Hulu does this with a viewer-first ad experience that has less commercial interruption, with ad breaks that are shorter and ads that are more relevant.”
