Benefiting from a strong performance by its Allstate insurance subsidiary, Sears, Roebuck & Company, the nation's biggest retailer and a leading financial services company, yesterday posted a sharp increase in its third-quarter earnings.
The company's net income rose 24.7 percent, to $409 million, or $1.08 a share, from $328.1 million, or 88 cents a share, in the similar 1986 period. Revenues rose 9.1 percent, to $12.19 billion, from $11.17 billion.
The quarterly performances of Sears's major components varied widely. The Allstate Insurance Group registered a 19.7 percent gain in net income, but the merchandising group, Sears's largest sales contributor, had relatively flat earnings as its sales rose 4.1 percent. The Dean Witter Financial Services Group almost halved its previous year's loss, while the Coldwell Banker real estate group realized substantially higher earnings, primarily because of the sale of a shopping center. 'It Was All Allstate'
''Over all, Sears looked very good, but it was all Allstate,'' said Robert F. Buchanan, an analyst for L. F. Rothschild & Company in New York. ''Allstate accounted for 59 percent of Sears's net in the third quarter and 68 percent of the total in nine months. Sears's merchandising is suffering from uninspired presentation and merchandise and a reluctance to bring in more national brand apparel instead of the private labels with their higher margins. The consumer wants brand names.''
Allstate's income in the quarter totaled $240.5 million, against $200.9 million in the 1986 period. Net income at the merchandising group rose slightly to $170.4 million, against $170 million, and revenues were $6.96 billion, up from $6.68 billion.
Dean Witter reported a loss of $4.2 million, compared with last year's loss of $8 million. Securities-related business produced income of $22.7 million, compared with $23.6 million a year earlier. Coldwell Banker's net income jumped to $47.8 million, from $7.8 million.
Commenting on the results, Edward Brennan, chairman and chief executive officer, said the company ''continues to expect a record year in revenues and income.'' In an apparent reference to the stock market's dive of recent days, he added: ''In light of recent developments, we believe it is important to emphasize the underlying strengths of the economy. The latest measures indicate that consumer confidence remains at a high level and gains in disposable personal income should accelerate in the fourth quarter and on into 1988.''
