Taking a page from the solar industry, Bloom Energy on Thursday unveiled a service to allow customers to buy the electricity generated by its fuel cells without incurring the capital costs of purchasing the six-figure devices.
The company is introducing its Bloom Electrons service nearly a year after the once-secretive Silicon Valley start-up unveiled its Bloom Energy Server, a 100-kilowatt solid oxide fuel cell at a news conference that offered testimonials from Arnold Schwarzenegger, then the California governor; Colin Powell, the former secretary of state; and top executives from Google, Wal-Mart and eBay.
Fuel cells, which convert hydrogen, natural gas or another fuel into electricity through an electrochemical process, have long held out the promise of cheap and plentiful energy while emitting fewer pollutants than conventional power plants.
But the $700,000 to $800,000 cost of the ‘Boom Box’ has proven steep for potential customers other than the Fortune 500 companies that have bought the sleek metallic cubes. “Certain companies want complete control of their energy and want to own the box,” K.R. Sridhar, Bloom Energy’s co-founder and chief executive, said in an interview on Thursday. “Others want to scale deployment without deploying their capital. Bloom Electrons is an additional way to do that and reach educational institutions, health care organizations and nonprofits.”
Under the Bloom Electrons service, customers sign 10-year contracts to purchase the electricity generated by Bloom Energy Servers while the company retains ownership of the fuel cells and responsibility for their maintenance.
Mr. Sridhar said Bloom Electrons has so far signed up customers for 200 Bloom Energy Servers to be installed at organizations like the California Institute of Technology, Kaiser Permanente, the giant health maintenance organization, as well as at existing customers like Wal-Mart and Coca-Cola.
Bloom has formed a subsidiary in partnership with Credit Suisse and Silicon Valley Bank to operate Bloom Electrons. The main market for the service is likely to be in California, given the state’s generous subsidies that can halve the cost of fuel cells and the electricity they produce.
When solar panel installers began offering lease options to residential customers who wanted to avoid the expense of owning photovoltaic arrays, business exploded. One company, Sungevity, has said that 95 percent of its customers now opt to lease rather than own.
“Why did the mobile phone spread around the world? It was a pay-by-the-minute model,” said Mr. Sridhar, a former NASA scientist. “It’s my firm belief that when we go to the developing world, it’s a pay-for-the-electrons model that will work.”
How are climate change, scarcer resources, population growth and other challenges reshaping society? From science to business to politics to living, our reporters track the high-stakes pursuit of a greener globe in a dialogue with experts and readers.
