HONG KONG — Sudden shortages of gasoline and diesel fuel in southeastern China have highlighted an ongoing debate over how quickly corporate influence and freedom of information are driving China toward a market-based economy.
Many service stations in southeastern China, notably in cities near Hong Kong, have abruptly run out of fuel this week, just as officials in Beijing are debating requests from domestic oil companies to charge more for diesel and gasoline.
China regulates retail fuel prices, changing them no more than once a month. To limit inflation, the government has not raised fuel prices this year nearly as quickly as world oil prices have risen. This has left refiners with negligible profit margins and even losses as they convert oil into gasoline and diesel.
Sinopec, the state-controlled oil company that dominates the refining of fuel in China, especially in the southeast, said Wednesday that the shortages were the result of basic changes in the Chinese economy.
People in China now have much more access to information about world prices and are filling up their gasoline tanks after seeing high prices on oil markets and concluding that Beijing will soon have to raise domestic retail prices for diesel and gasoline, said Evan Jia, a Sinopec spokesman.
While there are no reliable figures on private storage capacity for fuel in China, oil analysts said it was likely to be considerable because years of electricity shortages have prompted factories across the country to install backup diesel generators and large fuel tanks.
The timing of the latest shortages, which coincide with an active debate in the government-controlled media over whether China should liberalize retail energy prices, has made many energy analysts suspicious.
Sam Dale, an Asian oil analyst in Singapore with Energy Intelligence, a newsletter publishing company based in New York, said oil companies appeared to be putting pressure on the Chinese government to relinquish control of retail prices by running their refineries below capacity and holding back supplies from the market.
