Enterprise Products Partners, one of the nation’s biggest pipeline operators, said on Tuesday that it would buy Enterprise GP Holdings in a deal valued at more than $8 billion, simplifying the corporate structure of the group founded by the late billionaire Dan Duncan.
Under the terms of the deal, unit holders in Enterprise GP would receive 1.5 units of Enterprise Products, or about $57.68 at Friday’s closing price. That represents about a 16 percent premium to Enterprise GP’s Friday closing price of $49.90.
Enterprise GP is a public master limited partnership, or M.L.P., with about 23 percent of its units held by the public and the rest by the family of Mr. Duncan. It did not own any assets, instead generating cash flow from Enterprise Products.
M.L.P.’s are a popular class of energy-related equities that pay steady dividends and offer a favorable tax structure. Similar to a real estate investment trust, M.L.P.’s pay out the majority of their free cash flow to investors, thereby avoiding paying corporate income taxes.
Enterprise GP, like other general partner holding companies in M.L.P.’s, is entitled to large cash dividends known as incentive distribution rights. The payments receive an increasingly larger part of the cash flow of the underlying M.L.P., in this case, Enterprise Products, over time.
A Duncan family entity that owns a majority stake in Enterprise GP, Enterprise Products Company (known as Epco), has agreed to waive more than $275 million worth of cash payments for the first five years after the deal closes.
Enterprise GP’s public unit holders will not get a say in the deal, potentially irritating investors who bought into the business for increasing dividend payments. Epco, which owns about 76 percent of Enterprise GP’s units, has agreed to vote in favor of the deal.
Barclays Capital and the law firms Andrews Kurth and Morris, Nichols, Arsht, & Tunnell advised Enterprise Products. Credit Suisse and the law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom advised the audit, conflicts and governance committee of Enterprise Product’s general partner.
