Enterprise Products Partners said Monday that it was acquiring Teppco Partners in an all-stock deal valued at $3.3 billion, forming what they said would be the largest publicly traded energy partnership.
Under the terms of the deal, Teppco unit holders would receive 1.24 Enterprise units, valued at $31.36, for each of their Teppco units. That represents a 9.3 percent premium over Teppco’s closing price on Friday.
The deal is valued at about $500 million more than the $2.8 billion cash-and-stock deal Enterprise first put on the table in March. That offer was later rejected by Teppco’s management as being too low.
Teppco and Enterprise are both master limited partnerships, which is a popular asset class of energy-related equities that pays steady dividends and offers a favorable tax structure. Similar to a real estate investment trust, master limited partnerships pay out the majority of its free cash flow to its investors. That allows these partnerships the luxury of not paying corporate income taxes.
With most of the cash going to pay unit holders, there isn’t much left over for capital expansion. Teppco and other master limited partnerships rely on borrowing money to pay for future projects, and this allows unit holders to continue receiving a strong yield payout for years to come.
But the credit crisis, combined with the fall in energy demand, has hurt Teppco and other smaller master limited partnerships on the both the revenue side and the capital-expansion side of the business. Teppco has fought mightily to maintain its investor-grade credit rating in order to keep the debt markets open to the company.
The deal brings Teppco into the Enterprise family officially, allowing the company to benefit from Enterprise’s stronger balance sheet and more stable yield payout. Enterprise gains by acquiring a more diverse mix of products and shipping routes via Teppco’s extensive oil products network.
The combined partnership will control a significant amount of midstream energy assets including 48,000 miles of pipelines; 200 million barrels of natural gas liquid, refined product and crude oil storage capacity; 27 billion cubic feet of natural gas storage capacity; 60 product terminals, and the largest inland tank barge companies in the United States.
Enterprise’s chief financial officer, W. Randall Fowler, said Monday on a conference call with investors that even though the combined company would be huge, the deal was not expected to encounter much opposition from the federal regulators because the two already share a common controlling shareholder.
The deal involved a slew of advisers: Barclays Capital and the law firm Andrews Kurth for Enterprise; Lazard and the law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom for the audit, conflicts and governance committee of Enterprise’s general partner; Morgan Stanley and the law firm Baker & Hostetler for the audit, conflicts and governance committee of Enterprise GP; the law firm Baker Botts for Teppco; and Credit Suisse for the special committee of the audit, conflicts and governance committee of Teppco’s general partner.
