THE miniature business miracle began in January at a diplomatic reception in Oslo for the Soviet Prime Minister, Nikolai I. Ryzhkov. What captured his interest was not diplomacy but a more consuming passion: fishing.
According to one person who attended the reception, Mr. Ryzhkov was introduced to - and captivated by - representatives of O. Mustad & Son A/S, an international conglomerate whose crowning jewel is a fish hook with a barb that is both a trade secret and a fishing legend.
Within days, Mustad representatives were in Moscow, as visa delays and other bureaucratic obstacles evaporated before them and the outline of a new joint venture production agreement (Soviet hooks, Norwegian barbs) was drafted.
Mustad is one of hundreds of entrants in the joint venture sweepstakes, a new frontier of Soviet-Western trading opportunities that will be the center of attention when more than 500 American business executives representing nearly 200 companies arrive here tomorrow. The delegation, the largest American commercial group ever to visit Moscow, will be headed by Secretary of Commerce C. William Verity Jr. In the last three years, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, has presided over Communist Party and Government actions to prod the somnolent Soviet economy into action and to expand commercial relations with the West. As part of that effort, a law that took effect Jan. 1, 1987, made it possible for capitalist institutions to own as much as 49 percent equity in any joint venture in the world's largest Socialist economy.
The Americans are coming at a time of hope and confusion, when the prospects for stability in East-West relationships are as good as they have been in a decade, but when the expansive hopes for new East-West trade are also falling victim to a thousand bureaucratic pinpricks.
''The single most important thing, businessmen are saying, is that a stable attitude is being created,'' said James H. Giffen of the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Trade and Economic Council. The group, which is sponsoring the delegation to Moscow, is a private forum set up in 1973 under an agreement signed by President Nixon and Leonid I. Brezhnev. It has 300 American and 150 Soviet members and offices in Moscow and New York.
''The products wanted cut right across the spectrum: food, agribusiness, energy, environmental protection, chemical and petrochemical products, transportation, communications, automation, consumer goods and services,'' Mr. Giffen said.
According to a Congressional report written by an expert for the Central Intelligence Agency, Joan F. McIntyre, the Soviet partners also welcome quality control ''to help assure that the products meet world market standards.''
''If you know how the system operates over there and you know what's going on and you know the right people to talk to and you know how to prepare a proposal and how to carry out the negotiation, you can cut through a lot of problems,'' Mr. Giffen said.
As Mr. Hewett, a specialist on the Soviet economy, described it in an interview during a recent trip to Moscow, joint ventures will inevitably occupy a fringe role in a trade picture dominated by exports and imports.
In 1985, the Russians sold $26.4 billion worth of commodities - 35 percent of it petroleum and 18 percent military hardware. During the same year they imported $25.8 billion, with grain ($5.2 billion) and machinery and equipment ($4.8 billion) forming the largest categories. But the Soviet market is as inflexible as it is big. The 1987 partial decentralization of economic decision-making left exports in the hands of enterprises that have not had much experience and have little incentive, Mr. Hewett said. ''The only way right now anyone should think of doing business with the Soviet Union is to hook onto the love affair with joint ventures,'' he added.
''Many companies are already trying to exploit this bonanza,'' Ivan D. Ivanov, the Soviet trade official identified as the architect of the new law, said a year ago as he made a sales pitch to Western business executives and bankers in Davos, Switzerland. Trying? Perhaps. Succeeding? Rarely. With the exception of an American-Japanese-Italian petrochemical venture headed by Dr. Armand Hammer's Occidental Petroleum Company, the West German, French, Finnish, Japanese and American companies involved represent ''a few tens of millions'' in capital assets, according to one Western commercial attache.
Western economists estimate that more than $6 billion in capital from Western companies has been invested in Chinese joint ventures as of Jan. 1, 1987, more than 90 percent of it after the Chinese sweetened the incentives of the original program.
According to Mr. Hewett and a number of executives who have tried to form joint ventures here, the Russians do not yet seem to be fully able to accommodate Western businessmen's needs to extract hard-currency earnings from a looking-glass world where the ruble is valued at $1.60 in the Soviet Union but valued at closer to 20 cents in the West.
So far the means of repatriating Soviet-based profits have been mixed. Some joint ventures will take some of their product abroad to sell for hard currency or use themselves, like the West German shoe company Salamander-Bund G.m.b.H., which will produce shoes in Leningrad, or the American company Management Partnerships International Corporation, which will help make personal computers for sale in the Soviet Union and software to sell abroad.
Some will dip into the hermetically sealed world of hard-currency expenditures within the Soviet Union. These include the West German fashion magazine and printing venture Burda Moden and the Finnair-Soviet venture that is refurbishing a Moscow hotel, And some will take their earnings in goods that can be sold on the world market. Combustion Engineering, a Stamford, Conn., company that last fall became the first American partner in a Soviet joint venture, has started producing control systems for oil and petrochemical refineries to increase efficiency and decrease energy consumption.
AND that question raises the issue of definitions and conceptual categories. ''Until now it has been hard to grant credit because there were no balance sheets to look at, no statements,'' said a Moscow representative of Deutsche Bank A.G.
And Ulf Ronnholm, director and president of the Finnish company Sadolin O.Y., which is producing automotive paints and construction adhesives in the Estonian capital of Tallinn, said, ''The difficult and bad moments for us came when we were dealing with such terms.''
The next question is finding the right people to explain things to. In 1987, the Ministry of Foreign Trade, designated by Lenin as the agent for Soviet business dealings abroad, saw its authority distributed among 20 ministries and 70 enterprises from the Baltic port of Tallinn to the Caspian seaport of Baku.
This year, things grew worse. The Ministry of Foreign Trade was combined with the Committee for Foreign Economic Relations into a Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations. Another group, the State Foreign Economic Commission, is a coordinating body made up of the heads of the major organizations now involved in foreign trade.
''The argument for decentralization is that you take people who know how to do these things out of the Foreign Trade Ministry and get them out into the enterprises and the ministries,'' Mr. Hewett said.
''So the joint ventures have gotten caught up in the whole business of reorganizations and the cuts,'' he said. ''These cuts have overloaded the whole decision-making system and the system for resolving disputes.''
Finally, the legal structure for joint ventures requires that they be the ward of the related ministry - the Ministry of Petroleum and Petrochemical Refining for petrochemical ventures, and so on. But the ministry is not only patron but competitor, and can easily make it difficult for basic raw material and transportation contracts to be fulfilled.
SO what is the answer, short of finding a Politburo member with a passionate hobby that can be translated into a production line? An institutional go-between familiar with the Soviet system and Western needs.
A variety of such mechanisms are being tried. Italian banks like Banco di Napoli and West German banks like Deutsche Bank are setting up regular channels for dealing with Soviet banking officials to discuss problems of financing, bureaucratic stumbling blocks and other elements of the joint venture obstacle course. A British equivalent is being organized.
He stopped there, offering an ''I'm not telling'' response to questions on whether the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Trade and Economic Council might establish some kind of agency schooled in the ways of the Soviet system to help business executives make deals here. But the clear message is that somehow, before too long, American business leaders will have a place to turn.
''If you could find the proper mechanism, the areas for expansion are unlimited in nonstrategic trade, which would be profitable in terms of the return on investment to the American company and the Soviet partner,'' Mr. Giffen said. SOME JOINT PROJECTS A sampling of joint ventures between the Russians and Western companies UNITED STATES Name: Applied Engineering Systems
