ANGRY shareholders have flexed their muscles in recent months at Disney, Safeway and Hewlett-Packard. So why the radio silence leading up to the annual shareholders meeting of Freddie Mac, the mortgage giant, this Wednesday? It is not as if things have gone swimmingly at Freddie Mac lately.
Accounting improprieties beginning in 2000 led Freddie Mac to restate by $5 billion its financial results for that year, 2001 and the first three quarters of 2002. Two former chief executives at the company were defenestrated during three months last year and two investigations concluded that Freddie Mac flouted accounting rules and disclosure standards to smooth earnings growth. The company is still late in its financial reporting.
Gregory P. Taxin, chief executive of Glass Lewis & Company, an institutional advisory firm in San Francisco, says he is puzzled by the apparent lack of outrage from Freddie Mac shareholders. ''This is another situation where the deficiencies in the corporate democracy system are quite evident,'' he said. ''This is a board that flubbed it horribly over the last 12 months, and yet they will all be re-elected, maybe with little protest.''
Thirteen directors are on the ballot at Freddie Mac, including Richard F. Syron, the company's new chairman and chief executive. Glass Lewis is advising Freddie Mac shareholders to withhold votes from 10 directors who served on the company's board when its oversight was lax.
FOUR of the directors standing for re-election have served recently on Freddie Mac's audit committee, which can certainly be said to have failed in its duties. These directors are Michelle Engler, a lawyer and trustee of JNL Investor Series Trust, an investment company; Shaun F. O'Malley, a former chairman of Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm; Ronald F. Poe, president of a private real estate investment firm; and William J. Turner, founder of Signature Capital Inc., a venture capital firm. If re-elected, all will continue to serve on the audit committee at Freddie Mac. None of them returned phone calls seeking comment.
That directors of Freddie Mac, who failed rather spectacularly in their responsibility to shareholders, would not take themselves out of the running for re-election simply shows that shame is not a dominant gene in corporate America's DNA.
Michael L. Cosgrove, a Freddie Mac spokesman, confirmed that the company had received no shareholder proposals nominating new directors. He defended the board, saying: ''I think the board, when it became apparent there were problems, took assertive action.''
Major mutual fund companies are among the biggest shareholders of Freddie Mac. The Capital Research and Management Company, investment adviser to the American Funds Group, owns 5.8 percent. Putnam Investment Management owns 3.6 percent, and Fidelity Management and Research holds 2.6 percent. Investors who own shares of funds run by these companies should watch how they vote on Wednesday.
''There seem to be some pockets of change in corporate America, but some things haven't even come close to changing,'' said Bill Fleckenstein, head of Fleckenstein Capital in Seattle. ''How could you be on the board? How could you be sound asleep through all this?''
But, Mr. Fleckenstein blames inert shareholders, too, if they don't kick out the directors. ''Is this a case of corporate arrogance or shareholder stupidity?'' he asked. ''I could argue either side.''
