For the first two years after Jerre L. Stead took the job as chief executive of Ingram Micro in August 1996, it looked as if he had made an unconventional but smart bet by taking a big bunch of stock options instead of a salary. His options gave him the right to buy 3.6 million shares at $18 each, and the stock a year ago was at $54.
But yesterday, Mr. Stead's once-hot hand looked quite cold. He said he would step down as chief executive, although he would remain chairman, and with the stock closing at $13.31, the options were worthless.
Actually, Mr. Stead is significantly behind because he exercised options last December to buy one million shares for $18 million. As of yesterday, his position had lost $4.7 million, and he had had to pay $8 million in taxes.
Mr. Stead has had quite a ride. Since taking over Ingram Micro, the world's largest wholesale distributor of computer equipment, its annual sales have more than doubled, to $25 billion from $12 billion. But margins have been squeezed because of heavy competition and rapidly falling computer prices.
Yesterday, Ingram said it would earn 10 cents to 14 cents a share in the third quarter, sharply below the 41 cents that analysts had estimated. The company's profit margin will fall from 6.3 percent a year ago to below 5 percent.
''When I came on board, I said I would only do this for three to five years,'' said Mr. Stead, who is 57. ''Now it's clear that we get more top level support and search for the person who will carry the company forward.'' He also said he was confident that the company's stock would rebound and that his paper losses would revert to profits.
Mr. Stead said the company had been suffering because there were too many computer distributors, all trying to compete by lowering margins. Earlier this year, Ingram decided to maintain its share by lowering prices to match its competition, but now it is raising prices again.
Mr. Stead insisted that the company's strategy was still sound. Nonetheless, he said Ingram would not be able to regain health until some of the smaller distributors failed or were acquired by larger firms.
''They attributed their problem to a horrendous competitive environment, but we don't believe that,'' he said, pointing out that Tech Data, the second-largest distributor, had not had as many problems. Mr. Pitt attributed some of Ingram's poor results to a cost-cutting campaign announced in March that eliminated 10 percent of the company's 14,000 jobs. Morale is critical because much of Ingram's business comes from its huge telephone sales force, competing against other distributors every day for orders from local dealers.
Analysts said it would be difficult for Ingram to find a suitable replacement for Mr. Stead, a veteran computer executive who had been chief executive of Square D, AT&T Global Information Systems and Legent.
''There are no success stories in this industry,'' Mr. McCarthy said. ''The best companies are Ingram and Tech Data and that's only because they have survived with mediocre performance. Jerre was playing his hand pretty well for an industry that is oversupplied, with low margins, and where prices change at the whims of the manufacturers.''
