Jamie Gamble spent most of his career as a partner at the law firm Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, which counts virtually every major company in the United States — including Facebook, General Motors, Google and JPMorgan Chase — among its clients.
A longtime lawyer for the insurance giant American International Group, Mr. Gamble worked alongside Richard Beattie, Simpson Thacher’s chairman at the time, to advise A.I.G. during the financial crisis of 2008 and in the years of litigation that followed.
He made that determination about five years ago when he started to work on a novel that recently inspired him to compose a provocative essay elucidating what he calls, based on his firsthand experience, a “complex network of horribles” in corporate America. He recently shared a draft with a small number of colleagues, seeking their comments.
“The corporate entity is obligated to care only about itself and to define what is good as what makes it more money,” he writes in the essay. “Pretty close to a textbook case of antisocial personality disorder. And corporate persons are the most powerful people in our world.”
Mr. Gamble’s change of heart will not exactly come as a revelation to the increasingly vocal group of investors, politicians and even chief executives who are pushing companies to be more responsible and to focus on metrics like environmental sustainability and corporate governance rather than on simply maximizing profits.
Perhaps most significantly, he has devised a provocative new governance rule that he believes will fix what ails corporate America, although he acknowledges in his essay that his idea “is likely to seem insane to senior corporate executives and boards of directors.”
Mr. Gamble’s proposal is this: that every company devise a set of ethical rules to be part of their bylaws, a move that would potentially open them up to shareholder lawsuits should they fail to stick to those rules.
Companies, he suggests, should “adopt a binding set of ethical rules, approved by stockholders and addressing the key ethical dimensions of corporate life” including: ■ Their “relationships with employees.” ■ Their “relationships with the communities in which they produce and sell.” ■ Their “relationships with customers.” ■ Their “effects on the environment.” ■ And their “effects on future generations.”
Once the rules are in place, he writes, “any shareholder could sue the board of directors for violating the ethical rules — just as any shareholder can today sue the board of directors for violating the maximize rule.”
Today, corporate directors’ decisions are measured — at least from a legal perspective — on whether they maximize shareholder value. When they stray from doing that in the short term, they are protected by the “business judgment rule” if they can show that whatever decisions they have made are geared toward maximizing value in the long term. It may be an oversimplification, but if they veer from seeking profits in the name of other stakeholders, shareholders may have a legal case against them. Nowhere in their responsibilities are they expected to consider any stakeholder but the company.
Adding a set of ethical principles to a company’s bylaws would mean that “the people charged with acting for the corporation will have to discuss how the corporation should act and will have to account in that discussion for how the corporation’s actions affect others,” Mr. Gamble writes. “They will have to make a conscience.”
His idea is not that different from one proposed by Senator Elizabeth Warren, the Massachusetts Democrat and presidential contender, who typically sends shudders through the business community. Last year, Ms. Warren proposed that companies with more than $1 billion in annual revenue be required to obtain a federal charter to be a United States corporation that obligates “company directors to consider the interests of all corporate stakeholders.”
Given that there are already a growing number of do-gooder proxy contests and lawsuits grounded in little more than platitudes, I told him his idea was likely to mire companies in endless litigation (which might be good for lawyers).
He acknowledged the possibility, but he also insisted that “the ethics rules will work within an existing system that is highly deferential to management.” He also argued that “to overcome the business judgment rule in the context of an ethics case, a plaintiff would need to show ‘bad faith’ in legal terms.”
Mr. Gamble believes that enshrining ethics in a company’s bylaws would actually reduce the number of proxy contests and lawsuits because, as he writes, “there would be a defined form of protest (an ethics derivative suit) and because the prior consideration of social concerns by the company would make it harder to portray the company as unfeeling and unreasonable.”
“Most of my clients were smart and thoughtful people who see the failings of the economic system as well as its benefits,” he said. “I expect many will disagree with the idea. I don’t expect any will be offended.”
“The fix I propose leaves the private islands of power private,” he said. “The only interference by government would be to require that the shareholders explicitly state what kind of person they want their corporation to be.”
