Filling a position that has been vacant for more than a year, Abbott Laboratories yesterday named a new president and chief operating officer, Thomas R. Hodgson. The move follows a period of uncertainty at the big maker of health care products after the removal of its chairman earlier this year.
Mr. Hodgson, 48 years old, who has most recently been serving as executive vice president and president of Abbott International, will report to Duane L. Burnham, 49, who was named chief executive in January to succeed Robert A. Schoellhorn.
In March, Mr. Burnham succeeded Mr. Schoellhorn, 62, as chairman as well. Mr. Schoellhorn then sued the company and four outside directors, seeking to prevent his removal or any change in his employment contract.
In August, the company announced that it had reached an agreement with Mr. Schoellhorn. Litigation was dropped, and Mr. Schoellhorn retired effective Aug. 30. The financial terms of the agreement were not disclosed.
The announcement yesterday of Mr. Hodgson's appointment made no reference to the Schoellhorn case. ''What we've determined now is that we will have a president and chief operating officer,'' Mr. Burnham said. ''This puts in place a final organization to lead Abbott into the 90's.''
''I believe that goal has existed for almost 20 years,'' Mr. Burnham said yesterday. ''We will continue to maintain it, but we would not maintain it if it meant impairing the strategic strength of the company. That's not to suggest that there's been any change in our goals.''
Mr. Hodgson, the new president, joined Abbott Laboratories in 1972 and was named an executive vice president and a board member in 1985. Before that he worked in Chicago for Booz, Allen & Hamilton, a management consulting firm. He is a graduate of Purdue with undergraduate and graduate degrees in chemical engineering. He also holds an M.B.A. from Harvard.
Abbott, based in Abbott Park, Ill., has interests in hospital supplies, pharmaceuticals, infant formula and chemicals, with annual revenues last year of $5.4 billion. The company employs 42,000 people.
