“At the request of President Trump, I took another look at our decision to close the Coatesville, PA facility and have decided to keep it open while we pursue additional work,” Ms. Hewson said in a statement on Wednesday.
The president tweeted in approval of the decision, calling Lockheed Martin one of the “truly great companies” in the United States. “We are very proud of Pennsylvania and the people who work there,” he added.
Employees at the Coatesville facility manufacture helicopters for Sikorsky, an aircraft manufacturer that is a subsidiary of Lockheed Martin. It was unclear whether the facility’s shutdown had been postponed indefinitely, and spokeswomen for Ms. Hewson and Lockheed Martin did not immediately respond to requests for comment on Wednesday night.
Lockheed had announced in early June that the facility, which employs more than 450 people, would be closed by the end of the year because of a lack of demand for rotorcraft. It said then that some production would be relocated to other sites that do manufacturing for Sikorsky.
Mr. Trump has also claimed credit for keeping manufacturing jobs in Indianapolis after Carrier, an air-conditioner company, said it would have to move jobs from there to Mexico. He called the chief executive of Carrier’s parent company, United Technologies, shortly after winning the 2016 election and struck a deal involving the layoffs of hundreds of the plant’s blue-collar workers and millions of dollars in tax breaks. The plant stayed open, but the facility has suffered from absenteeism and low morale.
The president’s promises to preserve industrial and manufacturing jobs were key to his election campaign in 2016. Pennsylvania voted for Mr. Trump after twice supporting Barack Obama and will once again be an important state during the 2020 election. Eight of the state’s counties that Mr. Trump carried have lost manufacturing jobs since he took office.
Representative Chrissy Houlahan, a Democrat whose district includes the plant and who has been fighting to keep the facility open, told The Philadelphia Inquirer that the decision announced on Wednesday “is a temporary reprieve and our work is not done.”
