Six drivers for the United Parcel Service were charged yesterday with participation in a theft ring that Federal prosecutors said stole more than $175,000 in jewelry, computers and other goods from delivery trucks and the service's midtown distribution center.
A 74-count indictment unsealed yesterday, which stemmed from an undercover operation run by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, accused the six drivers in Manhattan of selling the stolen property to bureau agents. Company officials said it was the biggest theft ring involving its drivers in its history.
A law enforcement official who spoke on condition of anonymity said some of the property was stolen from company conveyer belts in the large distribution center at West 43d Street and 11th Avenue, and from trucks making pickups and deliveries.
''We take seriously all threats to the security of the 12 million packages entrusted to our care every day,'' Mr. Godlewski said. ''I've heard of the isolated incidents where you've got a driver who works in the hub who is taking stuff out of there -- penny-ante stuff. Man, this is unbelievable.''
Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney in Manhattan, and Lewis D. Schiliro, assistant director in charge of the bureau's New York field office, said in a joint statement that there were 67 instances in which stolen property was sold to an undercover agent or to a witness who was working secretly with the Government.
The role of the doormen and elevator operators was not fully described, but the law enforcement official said that in some cases, the drivers would entrust the stolen property to the doormen and elevator operators, who had access to areas in their buildings where the items could be stored.
Among the drivers charged in the case, Robert Volpe, whose 19 years as a driver for the company was the longest service among those charged, was assigned a route that included West 19th Street between Fifth Avenue and Avenue of the Americas, the indictment said.
Prosecutors charged Mr. Volpe with conspiring with a doorman at 16-20 West 19th Street, who was described in the indictment only as Ralph, to steal more than $90,000 in gold rings, New York State lottery tickets, jewelry, beepers, Swiss Army knives, watches and women's T-shirts.
In some cases, Mr. Volpe and Ralph sold the stolen property directly from Mr. Volpe's delivery truck, the indictment said. Mr. Volpe and the doorman were also charged with offering to sell about 15 pounds of marijuana to the agent.
In Federal District Court yesterday, a magistrate judge, Sharon E. Grubin, released Mr. Volpe on $75,000 bail. Others charged in the case were also released on bond. Mr. Volpe's lawyer, Leonard F. Joy, said that neither he nor his client would comment.
Yesterday, as Manny Lopez, a driver for the company, was making his deliveries on West 19th Street in Chelsea, some customers were surprised to see him instead of Mr. Volpe. ''Everybody's saying, 'Where's Bobby? Where's Bobby?' '' Mr. Lopez said. ''I didn't know if he was on vacation or sick.''
