Sixteen black employees filed a discrimination suit today against United Parcel Service of America Inc., the nation's largest package-delivery company, saying they had been angered by racist graffiti and blocked promotion paths.
The workers, all on the West Coast, said the suit grew partly out of concern over several instances this year in which swastikas and ''KKK'' were scrawled inside a U.P.S. building in San Bernardino, Calif. They also contended that black workers routinely received more arduous assignments than whites and were passed over for promotions.
Mark Dickens, a spokesman for the Atlanta-based company, disputed the charges, saying, ''We have a policy that we simply do not tolerate discrimination of any kind.'' He said the company had immediately cleaned up the graffiti and had asked the police to investigate.
The suit, which was filed in Federal District Court in San Francisco, provides another sign that race and sex discrimination have become one of the most explosive issues in the workplace. Other companies, like the Mitsubishi Motor Corporation and Texaco Inc., have been shaken by similar accusations in recent months.
Jacqueline E. Mottek, a lawyer for the U.P.S. workers, said that she had evidence that black workers faced similar problems at U.P.S. distribution hubs in at least 10 Western states, and that the suit was seeking class-action status.
One of the plaintiffs, Jeffrey Wynn, said the ''KKK'' scrawlings first appeared on a bathroom wall in the San Bernardino center in January. He said that about two weeks later, he found the same letters jotted across a package on his delivery truck.
Another driver, William Lewis 3d, said that after he wrote to a top corporate official to complain that the incidents had left him feeling low, a division manager ordered him to undergo a day of medical testing, saying he feared that Mr. Lewis might be suicidal.
Mr. Dickens, the company spokesman, said the company would like to resolve the issues. But he said that since the workers decided to pursue the lawsuit, they had not wanted to talk further with the company, and ''we have basically arrived at a standstill.''
