Seeking to strengthen itself in the face of new competition, the P.G.&E. Corporation the nation's largest utility, announced yesterday that it would acquire most of the Valero Energy Corporation for $722.5 million in stock.
Valero Natural Gas operates a 7,500-mile gas pipeline system and eight natural gas processing plants. But the real prize for P.G.&E. is a group created by Valero that markets natural gas and electricity around the country.
Robert D. Glynn Jr., the president of P.G.&E., said in an interview yesterday that Valero's marketing unit would provide a core around which the utility would build a nationwide marketing organization.
This is the fourth major combination between an electric utility and a gas distribution company spurred by the drive in many states to open their utilities to competition in an effort to bring down rates.
Pacific Gas and Electric, the largest subsidiary of P.G.&E., is based in San Francisco and is a major utility in central and northern California serving 4.5 million customers with electricity and 3.5 million customers with natural gas.
California is one of a handful of states that will begin to allow customers to choose their own supplier of electricity beginning with large customers by 1998 and all customers by 2002. One goal of this and other deregulation plans is to allow customers eventually to buy their natural gas, electricity and other services from one marketer.
Each Valero shareholder will receive about 0.63 share of P.G.&E. common stock for each Valero share, based on the P.G.&E. closing price on Jan. 30 of $22.75 a share. The value to Valero shareholders, who will also receive shares in the spun-off Valero refining and marketing company, is about $14.25 a share. The deal was structured to be tax free, the companies said.
Bill Greehey, the chairman and chief executive officer of Valero, which is based in San Antonio, said, ''This transaction will enable us to accomplish one of the primary goals of our strategic plan -- increasing the critical mass of the natural gas services segment, thereby positioning it for future growth.''
The acquisition of Valero is the third recent investment in the natural gas industry for P.G.&E. In December it acquired Energy Source Inc., a Houston-based gas marketing business. This week it completed the purchase of the Teco Pipeline Company, a Corpus Christi-based company that is also a natural gas processing and transportation company.
There have been a series of large combinations since last year, with the first coming in July when the Enron Corporation, a major gas distributor and wholesaler of gas and electricity based in Houston, announced that it would buy the Portland General Corporation, a major electric utility in the Northwest. The deal was valued at $12.5 billion.
This was followed in October by the merger of the Enova Corporation, a major electric utility serving the San Diego area, with Southern California Gas Company, the largest natural gas distribution company in the nation, in a deal valued at $5.2 billion.
The most recent combination, valued at $7.7 billion, was announced in November with the proposed merger of Duke Power, one of the nation's largest utilities, with the Panenergy Corporation, one of the largest natural gas companies, which has been aggressive in pursuing customers.
