Last weekend, I had to fly to California for a speaking engagement—right smack in the middle of a book deadline. I was panicked. All those hours sitting in traffic getting to and from the airports without Internet access—wasted. And what if I couldn’t find wireless Internet service in the airport waiting lounges or the speaking venue? More hours wasted. No chapters would be turned in, no PDFs sent in for proofreading, and the book would not make its deadline.
That’s when a friend cheerfully offered to let me borrow her Verizon laptop adapter for the trip. Verizon offers these adapters for Mac and Windows in three forms: as a PC card, an ExpressCard, or as an external USB dongle (for laptops, like the MacBook, with no card slots at all).
What these cards give you is amazing: high-speed, unlimited Internet connections over the cellular airwaves. Pretty much anywhere you can make a call, you can also get onto the Internet. Trains, taxi cabs, at home—anywhere. Next to the national blanket of cellular high-speed Internet signal, the coverage of Wi-Fi hot spots looks confining and scattershot.
This thing saved my book. I worked all the way to the airport in the car (no, I wasn’t driving). I worked in the airport waiting lounge without having to look for, or sign up for, Wi-Fi service. The plane delayed? No problem—more work time for me. I worked in the two-hour drive to my destination city, too. The Verizon service (technically called EVDO but marketed as BroadbandAccess) is the future. High-speed wireless, all the time. It’s kind of like the AT&T EDGE cellular network I’d been using on the iPhone, except fast.
I reviewed BroadbandAccess a couple of years ago; two things have changed in the meantime. First, Verizon has rolled out its “Rev A” network—basically a nationwide speed boost. Second, the price for non-Verizon voice subscribers has dropped, from $80 a month to the same $60 paid by Verizon customers.
The reply: “We’re comfortable with pricing, which has been consistent since we launched in the fall of 2004. Uptake [number of customers signing up] is great, networks running tremendously well (Rev. A boosts both uplink and downlink speeds). Pricing is right where we want it. (Like I was going to say anything different than that!)”
yeah–it is amazing as long as you do not experience the endless dropped connection. I use wireless almost evryday at least for a couple of hours and the connection drops about four times in that time.
Yeah, it’s tough trying to have constant net access at a reasonable price. Depending on where you live and travel TMobils hotspots for 1/2 the price seem like a bargain. Also why the heck is the USB one soooo huge and ugly?
Thank you, thank you for recognizing that $60/month is not just another fee to add to the budget. I’m so tired of phone/cell/high-speed monthly charges and I don’t even subscribe to cable. However, I am so deeply unhappy with my DSL provider (Earthlink) that I’m looking for at any and all alternatives. It now seems that I could dump high-speed at home and just use the Verizon or Sprint service…at home or anywhere. (I called Verizon and the have a device for desk computers as well.)
I think it is great that there exists a service that is fast enough for people to use. But alas, only for those who can afford it. People usually find themselves in situations like yours (myself included) and ultimately big corporations try to take the fullest advantage of it, which is well within their rights. In any case, one day in the future we may finally have something cheaper as competition increases. Hopefully, we will have more than just the 4 cellphone networks we find today. :)
I love your “Missing Manuals” books and I’m glad that you were able to get your work in on time. But couldn’t you have “tethered” a Verizon phone (or ATT 3G) phone to your laptop via bluetooth to get similar internet connectivity.
Your post relates to another issue that was discussed by Times columnist Paul Krugman (//select.nytimes.com/2007/07/23/opinion/23krugman.html?n=Top%2fOpinion%2fEditorials%20and%20Op%2dEd%2fOp%2dEd%2fColumnists%2fPaul%20Krugman) about how the US is lagging behind other nations in cheap and competitive broadband access. Many of these companies have monopolies and it’ll take someone like Google, who is interested in the soon-to-be available 700mhz spectrum, to stir things up so that wireless broadband (and perhaps broadband in general) can become more affordable.
It turns out that the prices did drop, but what I didn’t count on was Verizon ‘s monthly fee being the bottleneck. To me they’re the only carrier worth having if you’re in NYC. They could easily be collecting an additional 30 bucks from me a month if only…
Unfortunately you’ve got to pay to play. And I admire your ability to work on writing/proofing book pages while riding in a car. I get dizzy whenever I try to read anything in a car or bus. Trains are okay though.
Two questions David: If I buy 2 adapters (one for my laptop, and one for my desktop PC at home), can I get on the EVDO network with BOTH machines for the 60 bucks? In that case, I could ditch my cable internet, and save 45 bucks right there.
Also, I have a Moto Q, for which I pay 45/month for the unlimited data plan. I was told that to tether my Q to my laptop would cost 15/month additional, so that I could use the Q as a PC card. That adds up to 60/month. My question is, if you pay 45 for a phone data plan, do you HAVE to tether the phone to the laptop? Or can you just pay 15 bucks more per month for the PC card/USB dongle? Thanks!
The speeds even for newer versions of EV-DO (highly theoretical) maximum of 2.4Mbps and a generally reported average of 400 to 700 kbps. This is massively slower than even the increasingly dated 802.11g wi-fi standard (max. 54Mbs), or cable modem (average 3-7Mbs) or even most DSL (700kbs-1.5Mbs)
The cell companies are desperately afraid that high-speed wireless internet will destroy their business model. [Ubiquitous wi-fi + Skype/Vonage = no more cell phones] and are thus trying to lock people into dated, expensive and slow cellular-based internet.
The comment about price is somewhat unwarranted on Pogue’s part, as $60/mo. for internet anywhere is reasonable when compared to cable-based high-speed data connections. My Time Warner service cost $50/mo. and was limited to a few rooms of my apartment. I canceled Time Warner service and kept the Mobile Broadband, for a total increase in cost of $10/mo.
One thing that nobody seems to be saying, interestingly, is that Mobile Broadband from Sprint (and, I’m fairly certain, Verizon’s BroadbandConnect as well) is NOT as fast as a real hard-line cable modem or DSL line. My typical Kbps rate (download speed) with Mobile Broadband is about 60-80 Kbps. With my wireless Time Warner connection, I was getting upwards of 300 Kbps (that’s 4x as fast)! So Mobile BROADBAND is a misnomer, as the speeds are NOT comparable to most real broadband services. Something to keep in mind if you are going to go with Mobile Broadband ONLY (at home and on the road) and you send or recieve large files (anything over 5mb) regularly.
So, other than bad tech support for Macs (a common shortcoming) and slowish speeds, I think Mobile Broadband is great. If you want Mobile Broadband AND a home connection, then you’re talking big bucks. I say pick one or the other (based on how mobile you are) and stick with it. Both speeds should increase over time.
One final note: If you have a BlackBerry or Treo and want to get unlimited data service on it, that you will have to pay for that separately from you Mobile Broadband data service. It feels kind of like a ripoff, paying for two unlimited data plans… why not share one? I guess it just doesn’t work that way. As with Pogue’s reply from Verizon in this article, it looks like it’s just another way corporate telecom juggernauts can get away with milking the consumer through confusing pricing and service plans and politically-savvy obfuscation. I’m not bitter.
You actually questioned a telco about why they had an expensive price? You wanted an answer from a telco that is suing Vonage because they still want to charge 30-60 dollars a month for phone technology that has not changed significantly in decades? These companies thrive on charging premiums instead of revving up their innovation and development.
I’ve had the service for 3 years with Verizon and I must say I’m a big fan; it forms a big part of my business in marketing and technology. I install CarPC’s for limos and this is a big selling point. I dont’ know how people live without it. I even watch my TV with my Slingplayer.
I’ve been thinking about this service lately to provide a truly virtual office. Does anybody know about the practicality of using it for your dedicated home connection as well. Can a wifi router be connected to it to support wireless around a house? If that were the case, you could dump your home service (+-$40) making the jump to $60 a lot less painful. Of couse, when the card leaves the house, everyone at home is dark. Maybe not such a great idea.
I have been using verizon broadband for almost 2 years. Speeds vary greatly. It can be quite slow even when it appears that you are in a location wiht full signal strength. I would like to see Verizon improve the sped of the network.
Waitaminutehere. So, for $20 more than what I am currently paying for highspeed internet at home, I could have it anywhere? All the time? Including at home, with no wireless router needed? I feel like I’m missing something. The catch, for instance.
Corporate executives are not the only ones who use VZW’s EVDO service. My company supports various government agencies and provides us with the EVDO cards for our Windows laptops. When the service works, it is great to have.
HOWEVER (you knew there had to be extra commentary), the key is “when it works.” In areas where my company has a lot of people working on site, bandwidth can be effected by the numbers of people connecting. Also, if you are stationary, you can be “dropped” by the cell tower if you are connected too long and the tower systems sense they need the bandwidth for a new user.
David Pogue's technology column has appeared each Thursday in The Times since 2000. Each week, he also writes the Times e-mail column "From the Desk of David Pogue," creates a short, funny Web video for NYTimes.com, and posts entries to his Times blog. In his other life, David is an Emmy-winning correspondent for CBS News, a frequent contributor to NPR's "Morning Edition," creator of the Missing Manual series of computer books, and father of three.
The latest version of the Kindle Fire is still focused on its main purpose: encouraging consumers to buy more stuff from Amazon. But it’s a lighter, sharper and faster pleasure than the prior model.Read more…
