The best hope for shareholders of the News Corporation may be Tom Perkins, the renowned American venture capitalist. He is the closest thing to a truly independent director on the roster of Rupert Murdoch cronies. Mr. Perkins also has some relevant experience: he quit the board of Hewlett-Packard five years ago over a phone-hacking scandal. That makes him a prime candidate to lead the charge for a badly needed overhaul of governance at the News Corporation.
The company’s shares have tumbled 14 percent over the last week, as phone hacking and other malfeasance at News of the World brought the abrupt shutdown of the tabloid and then raised the specter of the News Corporation losing its grip on British Sky Broadcasting, the British satellite TV group. Though shareholders bought in knowing that Mr. Murdoch called the shots, they are still entitled to expect independent directors to fight their corner.
The company needs a fully independent inquiry into what happened, a critical assessment of its current businesses and strategy and an objective review of governance, among other things. Yet there isn’t much nonpartisan thinking to be found on the company’s board. Though nine of the 15 directors up for election last August met Nasdaq’s standards for independence, they mostly don’t really reflect the word’s meaning.
Kenneth Cowley ran a News Corporation division for years and has served on the board for over three decades. Andrew Knight was chairman of News International, the division now under scrutiny, before becoming a director in 1994. John Thornton, now a professor in China, helped win business from Mr. Murdoch when he was president of Goldman Sachs. Few of the supposed independent directors lack a history with the News Corporation or its boss.
So the responsibility may fall on Mr. Perkins’s shoulders. His own phone records were hacked when Patricia Dunn, then chairwoman of H.P., hired investigators to uncover board leaks. He resigned, later talking of “the questionable ethics and the dubious legality” of the methods used.
Mr. Perkins, a founder of Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, also used the episode to rail against tick-the-box corporate governance, which he said was increasingly substituting for judgment. The mess at the News Corporation provides him a perfect opportunity to lead his fellow independent directors in practicing what he preached.
Morgan Stanley should keep two at the top. John Mack is due to retire as chairman at the end of the year and the board may well grant the title to James Gorman, adding to his duties as chief executive. Combining the two roles is far more common in the United States than in Europe. But the directors should resist the temptation.
Mr. Gorman’s rebuilding of the firm has been slowed by the uncertainty over regulatory reform and the economy’s effect on earnings across the financial sector. He isn’t without success. He notably saved $800 million of annual costs by persuading Mitsubishi UFJ to convert its preferred shares into common stock.
But Mr. Gorman is edging only slowly toward repairing and expanding fixed-income trading and the Morgan Stanley Smith Barney retail brokerage unit. Not only is it too soon to consider granting him another title, but making him chairman could prove a distraction from his day-to-day responsibilities.
A C.E.O. tending to those can leave the chairman to focus on monitoring top executives and shareholder interests. Chief executives should do the same, but there is an inherent conflict of interest in juggling the concerns of investors against personal ambitions. Appointing an independent lead director only partly offsets that.
Consider the fate of rivals like Bank of America, Lehman Brothers and Merrill Lynch, where having the same person serve as chairman and chief executive impeded the ability of the board and other executives to challenge decisions. Arguably, that also affected Morgan Stanley, which lost some $10 billion on a subprime mortgage trade, encouraged by the desire of Mr. Mack, who held both top jobs at the time, to ramp up risk.
Of course, splitting the roles is no panacea. It didn’t prevent some European banks from getting into trouble. And a few banks with one man in both positions came through the crisis less financially scarred than others, for instance JPMorgan Chase and Goldman Sachs.
But Bank of America and Citigroup have wisely embraced the separation of powers. If the right people are put in the two jobs, it creates a more effective balance and better corporate governance. JEFFREY GOLDFARB and ANTONY CURRIE
