IN the late 1980's, the economy of southeastern Connecticut was so heavily dependent on defense that it was one of the few regions of the country to have mixed feelings about the end of the Cold War. The construction of submarines plummeted and employment at Electric Boat in Groton, which built the boats and was once the state's largest employer, plunged by almost two-thirds, from 26,000 to about 9,000, while smaller defense contractors scattered throughout New London County suffered as well.
An increase in tourism and gambling helped absorb many of the people who lost their jobs, but there was still a hole left in the southeastern Connecticut economy. Soon, that hole may all but disappear.
Pfizer Inc., the pharmaceutical company, is building a new world headquarters for its research operations in New London. Even before the building is finished, Pfizer has become the city's largest taxpayer, home values around the area are rising as its scientists move in and many of the cultural, charitable and other community organizations are already realizing significant benefits.
Although area leaders are thrilled to have landed such a large company, no one said they thought Pfizer would replace Electric Boat, which still is one of the area's largest employers. But there is some concern that the area will once again become too dependent on one big company and that if the pharmaceutical industry hits a downturn, so will New London and its neighbors, just as they did when Electric Boat cut back.
Steve Sigel, executive director of the Garde Arts Center in New London, which has benefited from having Pfizer in New London, cautioned that the region cannot rely on a single company, as it learned over the last decade.
''We can't all sit back and expect miracles to happen when Pfizer opens and brings in all these employees,'' Mr. Sigel said. ''There's this expectation that the community will be transformed, but it should motivate others, other businesses and individuals, to join with them and invest in the community.''
John C. Markowicz, executive director of the Southeastern Connecticut Enterprise Region, a regional economic development organization, said he wouldn't want to see the area economy become dependent only on tourism or only on pharmaceuticals.
Mayor Ernest Hewett of New Longdon said there was not much chance of the region falling back into a single-industry economy, because developments such as Pfizer are generating the kind of prosperity that is attracting a wealth of diversity.
''I think it's the greatest thing that's ever happened to New London,'' Mr. Hewett said. ''What Pfizer has done is to spark all kinds of other development. Everybody's looking to do something in New London, because you're going to have all these high-income people working at Pfizer and either living in the city or driving to it every day.''
''It was a tectonic shift in the economy of southeastern Connecticut, from a largely defense-based economy, to a much more diverse economy,'' he said. Today, if any one sector of the economy falters, he believed the region won't be thrown into the same type of panic that accompanied the Pentagon budget cuts of the 1990s, he said.
Pfizer is literally transforming a section of the city. The old linoleum factory where the research complex is located has been converted from a polluted industrial site to a park-like campus, and Bentley Creek, once a foul-smelling waterway filled with garbage that ran through the property, has been restored to a healthy salt marsh.
Deborah J. Haupt, Pfizer's project manager, said that for the first time in many years residents will also be able to use the land near the river at the site. A new walkway, with seats and lighting, has been constructed for local access, looking out over Long Island Sound.
''We'll make sure the trash cans are emptied every day, and the cigarette butts are swept up, because the property will still belong to Pfizer,'' Ms. Haupt said. ''But everyone will be able to use it.''
The businesses around the Pfizer complex have already started to transform, reflecting both what has happened and what is coming. Stash's Cafe, just down the street from the construction site, once offered a lunch menu of hamburgers and beer; today it sells a lot of wraps, salads and coffee, to accommodate the construction crews and the Pfizer employees housed in temporary offices nearby, said Steven Stash Schiavone, the owner.
''We're serving probably 150 lunches a day on a good day, and three, four years ago it was less than half that,'' said Mr. Schiavone, who has been in business more than 15 years. ''It's not just the people from Pfizer anymore, either. At this point, it's probably three-quarters local and one-quarter Pfizer. We have a little momentum, and we're building on it.''
The Boston-based Corcoran Jennison Company has also announced it would build a new 110-room hotel and conference center near the Pfizer property, in large part because of a guarantee that Pfizer will take at least 30 percent of the rooms every night.
Cynthia H. Clegg, president of the Chamber of Commerce of Southeastern Connecticut, said Pfizer officials had approached her about working with small businesses that are interested in doing business with Pfizer.
''For small business it can be a little intimidating thinking about how to break through to such a large corporation,'' Ms. Clegg said. In addition, Pfizer has asked her to assemble a directory of New London businesses that can be distributed to its employees, so they know where to find a dry cleaner or coffee shop.
David M. Goebel, the chief operating officer of the New London Development Corporation, said by any measure, whether the number of new or expanding businesses in town, or property values, or the number of jobs, New London is enjoying significant growth. The city estimates that about 2,000 new jobs will be created in the area as a result of Pfizer.
Mr. Goebel's organization is working to develop the city's deep-water port. It convinced the Pentagon to turn over to the city, free of charge, an abandoned Navy research laboratory on its waterfront for economic development purposes. And it obtained state funding to purchase several key downtown buildings for renovation and reuse.
''New London is really a diamond in the rough, and it's been that way for some time, but there needed to be a reason to move past all the normal impediments to development,'' Mr. Goebel said. ''That's been achieved with the Pfizer development and we're starting to see some movement.''
Just two years ago, Pfizer announced it would build a 750,000-square-foot, three-tower office complex on a 22-acre site on the Thames River in New London, creating about 2,100 jobs and a total payroll of more than $200 million. Pfizer already operates a research and manufacturing center in Groton, where it employs almost 5,000 people.
Originally, the New London complex was to be done in two phases, but after the company acquired Warner-Lambert Inc. last year, it moved up the schedule, and now expects to put it all into use this year. In addition, the company announced just last year that New London will become the new global headquarters of its research organization.
The decision surprised many in the city because the property where Pfizer built was an abandoned industrial site with extensive contamination. The state provided $19 million for restoration, but Pfizer took a significant risk that it would come across the kind of problems that could delay its timetable, officials said. Kate Robins, a spokeswoman for Pfizer, said the company decided it was worth the risk.
''We can either contribute to urban sprawl, go out into a greenfield suburban office park somewhere and use clean land, or we can come in here and clean up a site and use urban land and hopefully create a catalyst for the city,'' she said.
Despite tax breaks the company received from the city, Pfizer is already the largest taxpayer there, handing over about $2.5 million this year. Daniel P. O'Shea, a Pfizer vice president, said the financial impact goes much further than just the taxes Pfizer pays.
When Pfizer announced it was going to build its research headquarters in New London, about 80 Pfizer employees from its operation in Groton were living in New London. Within 18 months that had increased to almost 200, and it is continuing to increase, he said.
The Pfizer Volunteer Program, which makes up to a $1,500 contribution to any nonprofit organization where an employee volunteers six hours a month at least six months of the year, put $54,000 into New London nonprofits in 1999, which increased to $72,000 last year.
''And I can tell you that our local philanthropy is guided by where our people devote their time, so as people move into New London and get involved with the groups there, our support of those groups will increase,'' Mr. O'Shea said.
''There's going to be a lot of disposable income that they bring to New London, a lot of charitable contributions they will make directly, and a lot of recreational and entertainment events they will participate in,'' Mr. O'Shea said.
Not everyone is convinced that the Pfizer effect is transforming New London. Susan Howard, a real estate broker with U.S. Properties in New London, said she knew of only two businesses that had moved in as a direct result of Pfizer: a Hartford law firm that will open a satellite office in the city, and a limousine company that provides rides for visiting Pfizer scientists to and from area airports.
But she said there was still 2,000 square feet of vacant prime office space at a project just down Howard Street from the Pfizer project, and in recent weeks two banks have vacated their offices in New London.
Others have questioned the city government's decision to sell Pfizer the property for the project for a token $10, to let the private New London Development Corporation use eminent domain to acquire properties around the Pfizer project for related development, and to give the company tax breaks that will phase in its assessment over 10 years. Mr. Hewett, the mayor, shrugged off those criticisms.
''I tell people, 'If you want to put up a $270 million complex and hire 2,000 people, well give you land for $1, and they kind of back off,'' he said. As far as the tax break, they didn't have to build it here, and without that tax break they might have gone somewhere else. A lot of people forget that they're still paying taxes right from the start, and they're already our biggest taxpayer.
''The fact is, while a lot of cities are looking to attract a Fortune 500 company, we were lucky enough to attract a Fortune 10 company, and they built on a brownfield property right next to the city's sewage plant,'' Mr. Hewett said. ''I think what we've done is provided for the future of New London.''
