(The new name is the subject of a shareholder vote on May 23. If the change is approved, the company’s ready; it has already reserved the ticker symbol “MDLZ” and the Web site address www.mondelez.com).
The company known as Kraft said that it planned to allot that brand name to the North American grocery business, which will sell products like Kraft cheese, Philadelphia cream cheese and Maxwell House coffee. That left the snack business, a higher-growth division with global appeal, in search of a new name.
Enter Mondelez. Kraft said that the moniker came from submissions by more than 1,000 employees around the world, who suggested over 1,700 names. The winner: Mondelez, cobbled together from submissions from a North American employee and a European one. It’s a combination of “monde,” the Latin word for “world,” and “delez,” a made-up word meant to suggest “delicious.” Hence, “delicious world.”
“For the new global snacks company, we wanted to find a new name that could serve as an umbrella for our iconic brands, reinforce the truly global nature of this business and build on our higher purpose – to ‘make today delicious.’ Mondelez perfectly captures the idea of a ‘delicious world’ and will serve as a solid foundation for the strong relationships we want to create with our consumers, customers, employees and shareholders.”
“It’s quite a job for a single word to capture everything about what we want the new global snacks company to stand for. … “I’m thrilled with the name Mondelez International. It’s interesting, unique and captures a big idea – just the way the snacks we make can take small moments in our lives and turn them into something bigger, brighter and more joyful.”
Other companies opting to rebrand themselves have invented words for their purposes. When Philip Morris sought to shed years of controversy with a brand change, it dipped into the Latinate well. Its new name, Altria, came from the Latin word “altus,” meaning “high.” (Philip Morris, coincidentally, is also the former owner of Kraft, spinning the food company out in 2007.)
And when Arthur Andersen’s consulting arm parted ways with the accounting firm, the business took on the new name Accenture. Where did the name come from? According to an article in The New York Times in 2001, the company began with 5,500 suggestions from inside and outside the firm, then whittled the list down to 10. “Accenture” was picked because it suggested an accent on the future.
The new name did not exactly win praise. “Accenture is plainly and simply not a very good name,” a branding expert told The Times in 2001. “One of the tenets of naming is, keep it simple. People have got to say, ‘got it,’ when they see it.”
Other companies that have done spinoffs in recent years have chosen to go a simpler route. When Fortune Brands decided to split itself into its home security and its liquor businesses, it kept the Fortune Brands name for the former and named the latter Beam Inc., after the Jim Beam line of whiskey.
Robert Passikoff, the president of the consulting firm Brand Keys, told DealBook that a name change might not matter. The Mondelez name will take a back seat to the company’s individual snack brands, and likely would not feature prominently in advertisements or on packaging.
