Last week, the operator of nearly 2,000 supermarket units nationwide and nearly 600 abroad was rumored to be the apple of the Belzberg family's eye and the stock reacted as most equities do in this situation, soaring on Friday by $2.375 a share, to $31.75, on a volume of more than 1.2 million shares. The stock closed yesterday with a rise of 67 1/2 cents, to $31.375, in heavy trading.
The timing for a Safeway takeover seems to be right. Analysts predict there will be many acquisitions in retailing over the next 10 years or so because of the tremendous cash flow in the industry and because the cost of entering new markets is virtually prohibitive. Shopping center growth, they said, also should slow noticeably.
''A lot of the movement in the stock in the past week is related to a much better fourth quarter than was expected and to indications that this trend will continue,'' said Ronald L. Rotter, an analyst at Bateman Eichler, Hill Richards in Los Angeles. ''Looking at Safeway strictly from the break-up value of its real estate holdings it appears the value of those holdings does not warrant speculation in the stock on that basis alone.''
Although Safeway has more than 2,500 stores, it only owns about 70 or 80 of them outright and leases the rest, he added. ''I am currently estimating Safeway's earnings for 1985 at $3.30 a share.'' Mr. Rotter said.
Robert M. Raiff, who follows Safeway for C.J. Lawrence Inc., said that Safeway historically had not positioned its capital in the most desirable fashion and that now the company must spend to build larger stores and bring its systems up to date.
''While others were spending heavily, Safeway has relied mainly on its increasingly outmoded base of conventional stores,'' he added. ''While older units were slowly being replaced with newer, larger stores, Safeway was continually being pre-empted by more forward-thinking competitors.'' He said that it was vital for the company to contiue its present program of aggressive spending.
Mr. Raiff said that he put Safeway back on his ''buy'' list last Friday because he felt the company's earnings potential was ''enormous'' and, as its domestic margins continued to improve, earnings should explode. Meanwhile, he pointed out, investors were enjoying substantial dividends.
''I think it's a company that has a lot of problems, which it seems to be coming to grips with,'' said one analyst, who asked not to be identified. ''But I just cannot see why the Belzbergs would be interested in Safeway.'' The analyst noted that many of the recent takeover rumors that had set off action in the stock had not developed.
Safeway attributed last week's gain in its stock primarily to its flat, but better-than-expected, fourth-quarter earnings, which were announced last Thursday. The company reported net income of $75.6 million, or $1.29 a share, for the quarter, compared with $75.2 million, or $1.30 a share, in the 1983 quarter. Sales for the quarter rose to $6.13 billion, from $5.78 billion.
Safeway's earnings in the third quarter of 1984 were hurt by the generally competitive conditions in Canadian markets from such concerns as Loblaw Companies and Steinberg Inc. and by the relative strength of the United States dollar, trends that continued into the fourth quarter.
Analysts said, however, that efforts to streamline the company's operations and strengthen its competitive position in key markets should contribute to good profit growth over the long term. They also maintained that further benefits might stem from favorable labor contracts and effective cost controls.
''I am projecting Safeway's earnings at 40 cents a share in the first quarter versus 37 cents a share in the year-earlier period, but by 1987 their earnings could be as much $5 a share for the full year,'' said Mr. Raiff of C.J. Lawrence. So far as the rumored Belzberg interest was concerned, he said merely that ''I can't figure it out.''
The Belzbergs are spending a lot of money elsewhere. They have have agreed to acquire, through a subsidiary, Scovill Inc., the maker of housing products, for $565 million. The Belzbergs are also seeking to increase their holdings in H.H. Robertson, a construction company based in Pittsburgh, to 18 percent, from 12.5 percent.
