The pharmaceutical company Merck deserves some sympathy, but not a lot, for the staggering loss it suffered last week in a case involving its painkiller Vioxx, which was withdrawn from the market because it raises the risk of heart attacks and strokes in a small percentage of patients. A Texas jury hit Merck with a symbolically staggering $253.5 million judgment (it will be reduced to $26.1 million under a Texas law capping punitive damages) even though the evidence that Vioxx actually caused the victim's death was extremely thin.
The verdict may reflect the fact that Merck was facing an extremely capable lawyer, while its own lawyers committed blunders that alienated the jury. But Merck brought a lot of this problem on itself - by failing to react quickly to evidence that Vioxx can be harmful in some patients and by promoting the drug beyond any rational use.
Vioxx is in a class of painkillers known as cox-2 inhibitors. These drugs are, in general, no more effective than many older nonprescription drugs at relieving pain, but they reduce the risk of the gastrointestinal bleeding and ulcers that afflict a minority of patients who take the older painkillers. Unfortunately, aggressive marketing propelled them to wide use by people at little risk of gastrointestinal side effects.
The Texas case - the first to go to trial - was filed by the widow of a man who died of an arrhythmia, or irregular heartbeat, after taking Vioxx. There is a good possibility that Vioxx was not responsible for his death. But this case was less about science than about punishing Merck for what jurors considered an egregious history of covering up evidence of risk while promoting the drug so heavily to consumers.
The overriding message sent by this verdict is that companies must jump at the first hint of risk and warn patients and doctors of any dangers as clearly and quickly as possible. They should not be stonewalling regulators, soft-pedaling risk to doctors or promoting drugs to millions of people who don't need them.
