The nation’s largest pharmacy benefit manager has stopped doing business with a specialty pharmacy used by the drug maker Horizon Pharma, in a sign of a further crackdown on the use mail-order dispensaries to help lift sales of expensive drugs.
The benefit manager, Express Scripts, sent an immediate termination letter to Linden Care, a specialty pharmacy in Woodbury, N.Y., on Monday. Linden Care in turn sued Express Scripts in Federal District Court in Albany on Tuesday, asking the court to reverse the termination.
A spokesman for Express Scripts said the pharmacy benefit manager was taking action against “captive” pharmacies that seem to be aimed at pushing a single manufacturer’s products. He said Linden Care seemed to dispense mostly products made by Horizon Pharma.
Horizon said it was “entirely false” to claim that Linden Care was a captive pharmacy of Horizon. It said less than 5 percent of its net sales were from prescriptions filled by Linden Care and processed by Express Scripts.
Linda Clark, a lawyer for Linden Care, said that about 59 percent of Linden Care’s business involves dispensing drugs made by Horizon Pharma, and 17 percent of its business comes from dispensing Horizon’s drugs to patients covered by Express Scripts.
Specialty pharmacies are typically mail-order companies that dispense drugs that often require refrigeration, injection and patient hand-holding. But some companies like Horizon and Valeant Pharmaceuticals International use them to help dispense more common drugs, like those for acne and arthritis pain.
If doctors send a prescription to the specialty pharmacy, there is less chance an insurer or pharmacist will try to switch to a less expensive generic product. Specialty pharmacies also take on the task of trying to get insurers to pay for the drug, relieving doctors of the headaches that might otherwise discourage them from prescribing an expensive drug.
Philidor, which Valeant had an option to buy, was a major dispenser of Valeant’s dermatology drugs and accounted for about 7 percent of Valeant’s total revenue in the third quarter. Valeant said on Tuesday that ending the arrangement would significantly disrupt its business in the fourth quarter and beyond.
In its termination letter on Monday, Express Scripts said it had learned Linden Care was a mail-order pharmacy even though it was in Express Scripts’ retail pharmacy network. The letter also said that Linden Care was regularly mailing drugs to Maryland, where its license had expired, and to California, where it had no license.
“Wearing those multiple hats as auditor, enforcer and direct competitor, ESI has today — with no advance notice — forced Linden Care out of ESI’s pharmacy network based on a trumped-up charge that Linden Care is mailing drugs out of state purportedly in violation of contract,” the complaint says.
Ms. Clark, the lawyer for Linden Care, said the company specialized in pain medicines, including narcotics that require special handling and are used to treat intractable pain. The sudden termination by Express Scripts was already disrupting patient care, she said.
Horizon has sought to differentiate itself from Valeant. It said it used multiple specialty pharmacies, with no ownership of any of them, to help dispense drugs like Duexis, which combines the common pain reliever ibuprofen with the generic equivalent of Pepcid, a drug meant to prevent the sometimes lethal ulcers and gastrointestinal bleeding that can be caused by prolonged ibuprofen use.
Duexis costs about $1,500 a month. Its two ingredients, prescribed as separate generic drugs, would cost no more than $40 a month, so many health plans and pharmacy benefit managers, including Express Scripts, do not want to pay for Duexis.
“Using two generics is not the answer for patients like myself,” Timothy P. Walbert, the chief executive of Horizon, who said he had several autoimmune diseases, told a meeting with investors on Monday. “These agents have been available for 30 years,” he added, yet “people still die” from gastrointestinal side effects of pain relievers.
Horizon executives say their use of specialty pharmacies, a program they have called Prescriptions Made Easy, helps patients get the specific drug prescribed by their doctors, not a substitute. The program also reduces co-payments for patients and in many cases provides the drug free.
Linden Care is believed to be the main specialty pharmacy used by Insys Therapeutics, which has attracted scrutiny for aggressive practices in marketing Subsys, a powerful narcotic, including in some cases hiring the adult children of doctors to be the sales representatives calling on their parents.
In June, a Connecticut nurse who was a top prescriber of Subsys pleaded guilty to federal charges of accepting $83,000 in kickbacks from Insys. Prosecutors said she was paid by the company for speaking engagements, even though in many cases the audience consisted only of friends or Insys sales representatives, not anyone who could prescribe the drug.
