In fact, Express Scripts Inc., the only major manager of prescription-drug networks that has not been gobbled up or embraced by a pharmaceutical giant, is talking up its independence as a big selling point.
Its message -- which is getting a receptive hearing from customers, government and the health care industry -- is that only by keeping its distance from big drug manufacturers can it guarantee consumers the lowest possible drug prices.
"Part of our selling process is the promotion of generic products to lower costs," said Barrett Toan, the chief executive of Express Scripts. "We stress that we are clearly a benefits manager. We don't make money dispensing drugs. We are not trying to increase anybody's market share except our own."
Statistics appear to bear out his cost claim. Express Scripts' average prescription cost is $28, compared with $30 for the industry as a whole, according to the trade publication F-D-C Reports -- The Pink Sheet.
Express Scripts is one of a handful of companies known as pharmacy benefits managers, or P.B.M.'s, which assemble pharmacy networks with discounted prescription prices for health insurers, health maintenance organizations and self-insured companies.
Of the six largest P.B.M.'s in America, it is the only one that has not come under the control or influence of big pharmaceutical companies. Three were bought outright: Medco Containments by Merck & Company for $6.6 billion in 1993; PCS Health Systems by Eli Lilly & Company for $4 billion in 1994, and Diversified Pharmaceutical Services by SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. for $2.3 billion, also in 1994.
"These alliances clearly have a potential for a conflict of interest," said Edward Lennard, president of Resource Rx, a pharmaceutical consulting firm in Washington. While such links can have consumer benefits, for example, by providing manufacturers with better market data, he said he was "more uncomfortable than comfortable" with them.
Bill Hemburger, manager of specialty products for Blue Cross/Blue Shield of Missouri, urged regulators to be vigilant. "We don't want manufacturers determining that their drugs are the ones to be used," he said. "These alliances can be detrimental if someone is not looking over their shoulders."
The regulators promise to do just that. In the Federal Trade Commission's recent approval of Eli Lilly's purchase of PCS, for example, one commisssioner, Christine Varney, said she was concerned about "clearly competing interests, and our job is to reconcile them."
Even so, the temptation to use their P.B.M.'s to market their products is probably difficult for the big drug makers to resist. F-D-C Reports, the trade newsletter, reported that Sidney Taurel, an Eli Lilly executive vice president, told a health care conference in May that the company's purchase of PCS would help it "insure the continued growth of Prozac," the huge-selling antidepressant drug. Mr. Taurel could not be reached for comment.
Express Scripts can snipe all it wants at its rivals' practices from a takeover-proof haven. It is controlled by a subsidiary of the New York Life Insurance Company, which holds 90 percent of its voting stock and 70 percent of all its stock. New York Life says it is highly pleased with Express Scripts' performance and has no plans to sell it.
The company makes no bones about exploiting conflict-of-interest concerns for marketing purposes. "We are the largest independent pharmacy benefits company, and we are very clear about focusing on that independence with our clients," said Mr. Toan, the chief executive.
It is a persuasive point for some customers. When the Coventry Corporation, a national H.M.O. based in Nashville that had contracted with both PCS and DPS, decided to consolidate its pharmacy benefits program with one company, it reviewed proposals from 20 P.B.M.'s before it gave Express Scripts the nod.
Rusty Hailey, vice president of specialty products for Coventry, said Express Scripts' independence was a major factor in the decision. "They aren't bound to be promoting one company's products over another's," he said.
FHP Inc., an H.M.O. operator based in Los Angeles, chose Express Scripts for much the same reason. "Large employers and health plans don't want to get in bed with Lilly or Merck," said Randy Jay, FHP's vice president of pharmacy administration. "That gives Express Scripts a distinct advantage."
The advantage has apparently helped the company's financial results. Express Scripts' profit surged 57 percent last year, to $12.7 million, while revenues shot up 45 percent, to $384.5 million, and Wall Street analysts project continued strong growth. Express Scripts' stock price has also climbed steadily, from about $25 a share in mid-1994 to $40.50 today, up $3.25, in Nasdaq trading..
For now, Mr. Toan is concentrating on the company's ancillary programs to generate growth. With nearly eight million members and 43,000 pharmacies in its network, the company operates its own mail-order pharmacy and manages vision-care and infusion-therapy programs. Last month, it started Practice Pattern Sciences to track how physicians treat different diseases.
"It's clear that Express Scripts is in good shape to absorb upcoming changes in health care," said Don Spindel, an analyst with A. G. Edwards & Sons. "So there is no pressure on them to align themselves with a pharmaceutical company."
