Mr. Farrow, whose résumé brackets famous Hollywood parents, Yale Law School and the State Department, is an unusual choice for a cable news show. But “Ronan Farrow Daily,” as his new MSNBC show is called, is surprisingly usual: Mr. Farrow’s debut on Monday was a lot like every other one on that cable channel, often with many of the same stories and interviews (Ukraine, the governors’ meeting at the White House) that had already been exhaustively examined by Mr. Todd on his show, “The Daily Rundown,” or, for that matter, by Joy Reid, whose new show, “The Reid Report,” also had its debut on Monday on MSNBC.
It was the first day, of course, and there are bound to be adjustments. But the premiere did suggest one thing: It’s not that Mr. Farrow, the son of Mia Farrow and Woody Allen, can’t handle the job of cable news anchor. It’s that for all the fanfare and promos about change and new faces, MSNBC is not really ready to alter its basic news formula.
Mr. Farrow told Jon Stewart recently that he wanted to use his show for social activism and that he would exhort his viewers with a “call to action.” On Monday, that turned out to be a little less than his words indicated. After a feature on college borrowing (he interviewed an indebted production assistant and an MSNBC perennial, the former labor secretary Robert B. Reich), Mr. Farrow invited his financially burdened viewers to send in pictures of themselves holding signs showing their degree of indebtedness: basically, college loan selfies.
Mr. Farrow wasn’t exactly inciting young Americans to take to the barricades. He did what all cable news hosts do routinely, encouraging viewers to respond to the show and express themselves via the Internet and social media.
That was about as radical as it got. Mr. Farrow presented a short film about people who still buy illegal marijuana in Colorado, even though it can now be purchased there legally. The video, which ran on YouTube.com weeks ago, is the result of an MSNBC partnership with Vocativ, a digital news start-up that mines the Internet for news or offbeat features. The feature had a refreshingly unpackaged look, but the information in it was not new or exclusive.
Mr. Farrow’s guests in the studio were almost shockingly familiar and old hat: Michael Steele, a former chairman of the Republican National Committee and an indefatigable MSNBC contributor, and Alex Wagner, who has her own show on the channel later in the day. There was an awkward moment in a discussion about a Kansas bill to legalize corporal punishment for children. When Mr. Farrow asked Ms. Wagner if she had been spanked as a child, Ms. Wagner declined to answer, saying she could foresee the salacious YouTube clips any direct answer would provoke.
Mostly, Mr. Farrow handled himself well, but there wasn’t much room in his script for spontaneity. He made an effort to seem hip. He referred to marijuana as “weed” and made an aside about the Ukrainian opposition leader, Yulia V. Tymoshenko, who was recently freed from prison, saying, that she “also has amazing hair.” (She has a signature braided blond crown.)
Subsequent shows may give him more to do, and MSNBC broadcast a promo for a more adventurous feature he did on Western aid in Africa, which shows how a good intention like food donations can sometimes have unintended negative consequences.
Beyond that, he didn’t talk much about himself, but he didn’t really have to, since his family has been all over the news of late, ever since his sister Dylan Farrow accused Mr. Allen of having sexually abused her as a child. (Mr. Allen denied the accusation, and Mr. Farrow has tweeted in his sister’s defense.) His mother recently cast doubt on whether Mr. Allen is really Ronan’s father, coyly telling Vanity Fair that he was “possibly” the son of Frank Sinatra. (He does look uncannily like a Morphthing.com blend of Sinatra and Ms. Farrow.)
On Monday, Mr. Farrow’s dysfunctional family followed him, even onto MSNBC. On “Morning Joe,” before Mr. Farrow was to talk about his “call to action” plans, that show played a clip of Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, criticizing an opponent for accepting campaign donations from Mr. Allen: “Woody Allen is apparently a big contributor of hers, too, you know. Woody Allen has been now accused of, you know, having relations with his children,” Mr. Paul said. “So, I mean, the thing is, that’s not really acceptable in Kentucky.”
