Express Scripts to Buy Medco for $29.1 Billion | Express Scripts said on Thursday that it would buy Medco Health Solutions for $29.1 billion, becoming the biggest pharmacy benefits manager in the country in one of the largest deals of the year.
But the prospects for the deal seem uncertain. The takeover is sure to invite close regulatory scrutiny. CVS Caremark — a merger that Express Scripts failed to prevent — has faced nearly nonstop criticism since it the merger deal completed. DEALBOOK | PRESS RELEASE
Morgan Stanley’s Posts $558 Million Loss, but Beats Estimates | Morgan Stanley reported a $558 million loss for the second quarter on Thursday, one that was smaller than analysts had expected, as its trading operations improved.
Morgan Stanley took a one-time charge related to restructuring an investment in the bank made by the Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group as part of a lifeline during the financial crisis. DEALBOOK | PRESS RELEASE
Danielle Chiesi’s Day in Court | Danielle Chiesi, one of the central figures in the insider trading investigation into the Galleon Group hedge fund, was sentenced on Wednesday to 30 months in prison. DealBook’s Ben Protess reports. DealBook
BC Partners Said to Be Near Deal for Swedish Cable Company | BC Partners is near a deal to buy Com Hem, the biggest cable company in Sweden, from the Carlyle Group and Providence Equity Partners for about $2.6 billion, a person with knowledge of the matter told DealBook. DealBook
Blackstone to Buy Jack Wolfskin for $995 Million | The Blackstone Group will buy Jack Wolfskin, a German outdoor retailer, from Barclays Private Equity and Quadriga Capital for what news outlets said was $995 million. The American buyout firm is expected to continue expanding Jack Wolfskin’s presence in Scandinavia and Eastern Europe, as well as China. PRESS RELEASE | FINANCIAL TIMES | REUTERS
Randstad to Buy SFN for $709.8 Million | Randstad Holding, the global temporary employment services company, will buy the SFN Group for $709.8 million in cash to expand its human resource offerings in the United States. DealBook
Mizuho Plans to Buy Stake in Vietnamese Bank | Mizuho Financial Group, the Japanese bank, is said to be planning to buy a stake in Vietnam’s largest public lender for as much as $760 million, Bloomberg News reports. BLOOMBERG NEWS
Nexstar Broadcasting Said to Be on the Block | The television station owner Nexstar has hired a financial adviser to aid in a sale that could fetch as much as $1 billion, people familiar with the matter told The Wall Street Journal. WALL STREET JOURNAL
Canada Growing Dubious About International Investment | Debate is raging across Canada over how big a role foreign investment should play in the country’s resource-rich economy, with the nation’s 13 provinces and territories rather than the federal government leading the discussion. Two major deal failures — BHP Billiton’s attempted takeover of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and the merger plan of the London Stock Exchange and the TMX group — are a sign of the times. WALL STREET JOURNAL
Acer to Buy Cloud Computing Firm | Acer, the largest PC maker after Hewlett-Packard, said on Thursday that it would buy the cloud computing firm iGware for $320 million, the latest move in an industrywide shift away from desktops and toward applications running remotely. REUTERS
Wells Fargo to Pay $85 Million Mortgage Settlement | Wells Fargo is set to pay $85 million in a settlement with the Federal Reserve over charges that its employees pushed clients toward more expensive subprime mortgages during the real estate boom. REUTERS | PRESS RELEASE
Taxing Europe’s Banks to Help Greece | Europe’s banks may face a new tax to help pay for the forthcoming Greek rescue, an official told The New York Times. Institutions would pay an additional .025 percent on assets, a levy that would raise about 50 billion euros over five years to finance a buyback of Greek bonds. NEW YORK TIMES
RBS Executive Acknowledges Tough Bond Markets | Just a few days before Royal Bank of Scotland announces its second-quarter earnings, John Hourican, chief executive of the firm’s global banking and markets business, has already come forward to warn of continued bond market perils.
“It wouldn’t surprise you to note that the entire fixed-income markets are more challenged in the second quarter than they were in the first, and we will be representing that trend,” Mr. Hourican said of the upcoming results. REUTERS
Austerity Banking | Banks in the United States are doing what they can to cut down on overhead — shutting down branches that are not pulling their weight, and moving operations to less expensive locations — as they try to claw back ground in difficult times. WALL STREET JOURNAL
Berkshire Said to Raise Bigger Fund | Berkshire Partners has raised 50 percent more than expected for its latest fund, closing it at $4.5 billion, Bloomberg News reported, citing unidentified sources. The private equity firm’s seven previous funds totaled $6.5 billion. BLOOMBERG NEWS
Quizno’s Feels Heat of Debt Problems | Saddled with debt from a leveraged buyout five years ago, wounded by the recession and suffering in a competitive market, the sandwich chain Quiznos has been forced to tell its lenders it will soon violate loan terms, putting it in danger of default. WALL STREET JOURNAL
Christie Finds Friends in the Hedges | Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey has apparently made new friends in the hedge fund industry. The governor told a group that included Paul Tudor Jones and Stanley Druckenmiller that while he did not expect to run for president next year, he might do so in 2016, according to Politico.
New Asian Hedge Funds Raise $2.86 Billion in First Half of 2011 | Signs are good for the industry in Asia, with inflows for the 24 new funds that opened in the region during the first half of 2011 attracting twice the amount taken in by the 70 funds established in the first half of 2010. FINALTERNATIVES
British Regulator Investigating Castlestone | Britain’s Financial Services Authority has opened an investigation into Angus Murray’s Castlestone Management that is believed to focus on the firm’s Ucits funds, which are based in Ireland. HEDGE FUNDS REVIEW
Santander Said to Delay I.P.O. of British Unit | The British unit of Banco Santander of Spain is expected to put off its initial public offering in the country until early 2012, despite the assurances last month of the chief executive, Alfredo Saenz, who said that taking the unit public this year was “a priority,” a person familiar with the matter told Dow Jones.
Santander UK’s chief, Ana Patricia Botin, had already emphasized in an interview with the BBC this month that the timing of such a move was crucial and that “right now is probably not the best time.” WALL STREET JOURNAL
Indian Lender Sets I.P.O. Price | L&T Finance Holdings, a nonbank lender, has set an indicative price of 51 to 59 rupees a share for its initial public offering, hoping to raise up to $280 million. WALL STREET JOURNAL
Strong Debut in Malaysia | Shares of the oil and gas vessel supplier Bumi Armada, which conducted the largest I.P.O. in Malaysia this year by raising $889 million, surged on their first day of trading. BLOOMBERG NEWS
Twitter Said Near a New $400 Million Round | Twitter is close to closing on a fresh $400 million fund-raising round that will be used to cash out current investors and employees, All Things Digital reported on Wednesday. That round would follow a $400 million round that would value the company at $8 billion, as previously reported by DealBook.
Meanwhile, Twitter’s chairman, Jack Dorsey, is showing the door to four product managers at the microblogger who were close to the recently departed co-founders, Evan Williams and Biz Stone, according to TechCrunch. ALL THINGS DIGITAL | DEALBOOK | TECHCRUNCH
Money to Be Made in Tech at All Levels | MyYearbook, a social networking site founded by three New Jersey siblings in 2005, has recently been sold for $100 million to a Latino-focused social network, the Quepasa Corporation, a healthy reminder that bellow the Zuckerberg-dominated stratosphere there is still money to be made in tech. WALL STREET JOURNAL
Will This Start-up Survive? | Yowie connects performers and their fans through live video chats, and it has established ties with Disney and Dreamworks after raising $2.1 million — but it has no revenue stream. NEW YORK TIMES
In Shadow of Debt Crisis, Firms Draw Up Plan B | Even as politicians seemed closer to a debt compromise in Washington, large investment firms have made contingency plans on their Treasury bond holdings. They are poised to save their money, and in some cases make more, in the event of a crisis, The New York Times reports. DealBook
Red Flags Over China Real Estate | China is taking steps to curb risk in its real estate sector, with regulators pledging to increase oversight amid international fears of a property bubble. The problem was also red-flagged by the I.M.F. on Wednesday, although the country’s elevated inflation rate is expected to peak within the next couple of months. REUTERS | BLOOMBERG NEWS
