Several more of the country’s most ubiquitous retail chains said this week that they will ask customers to refrain from openly carrying guns in their stores. The requests, days after Walmart announced a similar policy, marked a notable shift in the debate about the presence of guns in everyday life in the United States.
In a short statement posted Thursday, CVS Health requested that customers, other than authorized law enforcement personnel, do not bring firearms into its 9,900 stores in the country. Walgreens, with 9,500 stores, did so as well. Both chains noted that they were joining other retailers. Wegmans, a supermarket chain with 99 stores mainly in the Northeast, noted its request on Twitter.
As private entities, the retailers have the right to restrict guns in their stores. But it remained unclear how they might compel customers to comply, and the policies were framed as requests, not outright bans. Several other large chains have enacted similarly worded policies over the last several years, including Starbucks, Target, Costco and Chipotle.
The most recent wave of announcements began on Tuesday, when Walmart, the nation’s largest retailer with more than 4,000 stores, said it would stop selling ammunition that can be used in military-style rifles as well as all handgun ammunition, and it would discourage customers from openly carrying guns, even in states where it is legal to do so.
Shortly after Walmart’s announcement, Kroger, which is headquartered in Cincinnati and operates more than 2,700 supermarkets, said it too was requesting that its customers not carry weapons into its stores.
“Kroger has demonstrated with our actions that we recognize the growing chorus of Americans who are no longer comfortable with the status quo and who are advocating for concrete and common sense gun reforms,” she said.
He noted that after the shooting, there were several episodes “where individuals attempting to make a statement and test our response have entered our stores carrying weapons in a way that frightened or concerned our associates and customers.”
Gun laws vary widely, but more than 40 states allow some form of open-carry, according to the Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence, a gun control advocacy group. Some states require special permits or for the weapon to be unloaded, or restrict open-carry policies in cities. There are often exceptions to open-carry laws in schools, public facilities or places where alcohol is served.
Shannon Watts, the founder of the gun-control group Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America, called open-carry “a dangerous and culturally reprehensible practice” and applauded the companies for taking action.
