The Texas companies filed the suit Thursday in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas. The suit quotes extensively from CVS plans, presentations and even a job posting for a data analyst.
The Texas lawsuit accuses CVS Caremark of gaining too much control over patient information, including files from the independent pharmacies that must hand over patient information for insurance disputes.
CVS plans detailed in the lawsuit include what the plaintiffs said is a slide from a presentation by Troy Brennan, the company’s chief medical officer, in 2009. The slide, pictured below, shows how the company plans to develop a “Consumer Engagement Engine” with “a comprehensive view of the patient.” The computer screen would show the patient’s name, demographics, drug history, prescribers, health behavior (including “suboptimal adherence”) and communication preferences.
“We have learned that a new lawsuit has been filed, but we have not yet had a chance to review its contents,” she said. “CVS Caremark is confident that its business practices and service offerings, which are designed to reduce health care costs and expand consumer choice, are being conducted in compliance with applicable antitrust, privacy and other laws.”
CVS Caremark had nearly $100 billion sales in 2009 and is the nation’s 18th largest corporation, according to the 2010 Fortune 100. It grew out of a $26 billion merger of a pharmacy chain and a pharmacy benefits company in 2007. The company has already disclosed it is under investigation by the Federal Trade Commission and more than 20 states.
Prescriptions tracked news in the health care industry, including coverage of patients, insurers, medical professionals and drug-makers. Coverage of these and related issues continues in the Business and Health sections, as well as on the Well blog.
Pharmaceutical companies have cut spending on television advertising by 20 percent over the last five years, according to a Nielsen study. Analysts expect drug advertising to continue to fall as more brand-name drugs face generic competition.Read more…
