The raids were carried out as the workers — immigrants from numerous countries — finished their night shifts, said Garrison Courtney, a spokesman for the Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement. He said an office of a Wal-Mart executive had also been searched.
If there is sufficient evidence that Wal-Mart executives or the contractors knowingly used illegal labor, Mr. Courtney said, "obviously there is a possibility there could be criminal charges." He said a company that knowingly uses illegal workers can be fined as much as $10,000 per worker. He also said the arrested workers would go before immigration judges and could face deportation. It was not immediately known if any contractors were among those arrested.
A Wal-Mart spokeswoman said the company was still assessing the details of the investigation. "We first learned about the raids when store managers at affected stores began calling us," said Mona Williams, the vice president for communications at Wal-Mart.
She said that agents spent several hours searching the offices of a manager at Wal-Mart's headquarters in Bentonville, Ark., and then carted away several boxes of papers. "We have communicated to store managers to preserve store documents," Mr. Williams said. Neither Ms. Williams nor Mr. Courtney identified the Wal-Mart manager.
Ms. Williams said that Wal-Mart, the nation's No. 1 retailer, uses more than 100 third-party contractors to perform cleaning services in more than 700 stores nationwide. "We do not know if the current investigation involves one or more multiple contractors," she said. Nor could Mr. Courtney immediately shed light on that aspect of the case.
Ms. Williams, speaking from Wal-Mart's base in Bentonville, Ark., said that "we do require that each of the contractors uses only legal workers," though she said she did not know if Wal-Mart verifies that contractors adhere to that policy.
"You have everything from giant contractors to regional contractors to mom-and-pop organizations with mops and buckets," a union spokesman, Stephen Lerner, said, emphasizing that he had no details on the Wal-Mart situation. As a result, he continued, there is a "long history of litigation where we catch cleaners who bring in their whole family to clean, so the contract entity says, `They don't work for me, it's not our fault.' "
Referring to federal immigration agents as they were formerly known, Ms. Williams said: "We are talking to the I.N.S. and are committed to cooperating with them. As I understand it, I.N.S. agents had come into the stores and were arresting members of the cleaning crews and taking them out of the store."
The raids were carried out in Alabama, Arkansas, Arizona, Connecticut, Delaware, Kentucky, Massachusetts, Maryland, Michigan, North Carolina, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia and West Virginia.
Wal-Mart has been accused of skirting various employment laws in recent years. Class-action suits have been filed in more than 30 states accusing supervisors of pressuring employees to work off the clock for no pay.
In California, lawyers have filed suit accusing Wal-Mart of discriminating against women in promotions. The lawyers have asked a federal judge in San Francisco to allow the lawsuit to proceed as a class action, potentially creating a class of 1.6 million current and former Wal-Mart employees that would become the biggest employment class action in the nation's history.
Wal-Mart employs a total of 1.4 million people in the United States and overseas, and had $245 billion in revenue last year, equaling 2.5 percent of the United States gross domestic product. Each week 138 million shoppers visit Wal-Mart's 4,750 stores. Last year, 82 percent of American households bought at least one item there.
